.

 Toggle navigation 
 Theoi Project - Classical Texts
 Library 

 LIBRARY HOME 
 GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
 GREEK GODS 
 
 Olympian Gods 
 Primordial Gods 
 Titan Gods 
 Sky Gods 
 Sea Gods 
 Rustic Gods 
 Underworld Gods 
 Daemones-Spirits 
 Nymphs 
 more >> 

 BESTIARY 
 HEROES 
 MISCELLANY 
 
 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z 
 Family Tree of the Gods 
 Legendary Tribes 
 Legendary Creatures 
 Star Myths 
 Plant & Flower Myths 

 GALLERY 

 Classical Texts
 Library >> Apollodorus,
 The Library >> Book 2 
 APOLLODORUS, THE LIBRARY 2 

 THE LIBRARY CONTENTS

 BOOK 1 

 1 . Theogony: Birth of Zeus

 2 . Theogony: War of the Titans

 3 . Theogony: Olympian Gods

 4 . Apollo & Artemis

 5 . Demeter & Persephone

 6 . War of the Giants, Typhon

 7 . Prometheus, Deucalion, Daughters of Aeolus

 8 . Oeneus, Meleager, Tydeus

 9 . Sons of Aeolus, Melampus, Admetus, Pelias, Argonauts

 BOOK 2 

 1 . Io, Danaides

 2 . Proetus, Proetides

 3 . Bellerophon

 4 . Perseus, Sons of Perseus, Amphitryon, Birth of Heracles

 5 . Twelve Labours of Heracles

 6 . Wars of Heracles

 7 . Heracleidae

 BOOK 3 

 1 . Europa, Minos, Pasiphae

 2 . Catreus

 3 . Glaucus

 4 . Cadmus, Semele, Actaeon

 5 . Dionysus, Antiope, Amphion & Zethus, Oedipus

 6 . Seven Against Thebes

 7 . Epigoni

 8 . Lycaon, Callisto

 9 . Auge, Atalanta

 10 . Pleiades, Hermes, Coronis, Asclepius, Leda, Suitors of Helen

 11 . Dioscuri

 12 . Dardanus, Ilus, Priam, Aeacus, Telamon

 13 . Peleus & Thetis

 14 . Cecrops, Adonis, Tereus & Procne, Erichthonius

 15 . Cephalus, Oreithyia, Eumolpus, Aegeus

 16 . Theseus

 EPITOME 

 1 . Theseus cont.

 2 . Tantalus, Pelops, Atreus

 3 . Trojan War: Antehomerica

 4 . Trojan War: Iliad

 5 . Trojan War: Posthomerica

 6 . Trojan War: Returns

 7 . Odyssey & Telegonia

 THE LIBRARY BOOK 2, TRANSLATED BY J. G. FRAZER

 [2.1.1] Having now gone through the family of Deucalion, we have next to speak of that of
 Inachus. 1 Ocean and Tethys had a son Inachus, after whom a river in Argos
 is called Inachus. He and Melia, daughter of Ocean, had sons, Phoroneus, and Aegialeus. Aegialeus having died
 childless, the whole country was called Aegialia; and Phoroneus, reigning over the whole land afterwards named
 Peloponnese, begat Apis and Niobe by a nymph Teledice. Apis converted his power into a tyranny and named the
 Peloponnese after himself Apia; but being a stern tyrant he was conspired against and slain by Thelxion and
 Telchis. He left no child, and being deemed a god was called Sarapis. 2 But
 Niobe had by Zeus (and she was the first mortal woman with whom Zeus cohabited) a son Argus, and also, so says
 Acusilaus, a son Pelasgus, after whom the inhabitants of the Peloponnese were called Pelasgians. However, Hesiod
 says that Pelasgus was a son of the soil.

 [2.1.2] About him I shall speak again. 3 But Argus received the kingdom and
 called the Peloponnese after himself Argos; and having married Evadne, daughter of Strymon and Neaera, he begat
 Ecbasus, Piras, Epidaurus, and Criasus, 4 who also succeeded to the kingdom.

 Ecbasus had a son Agenor, and Agenor had a son Argus, the one who is called the All-seeing. He had eyes in the
 whole of his body, 5 and being exceedingly strong he killed the bull that
 ravaged Arcadia and clad himself in its hide 6 ; and when a satyr wronged the
 Arcadians and robbed them of their cattle, Argus withstood and killed him. It is said, too, that Echidna, 7 daughter of Tartarus and Earth, who used to carry off passers-by, was caught
 asleep and slain by Argus. He also avenged the murder of Apis by putting the guilty to death. 

 [2.1.3] Argus and Ismene, daughter of Asopus, had a son Iasus, who is said to have been the father of
 Io. 8 But the annalist Castor and many of the tragedians allege that Io was
 a daughter of Inachus 9 ; and Hesiod and Acusilaus say that she was a
 daughter of Piren. Zeus seduced her while she held the priesthood of Hera, but being detected by Hera he by a
 touch turned Io into a white cow 10 and swore that he had not known her;
 wherefore Hesiod remarks that lover's oaths do not draw down the anger of the gods. But Hera requested the cow
 from Zeus for herself and set Argus the All-seeing to guard it. Pherecydes says that this Argus was a son of
 Arestor 11 ; but Asclepiades says that he was a son of Inachus, and Cercops
 says that he was a son of Argus and Ismene, daughter of Asopus; but Acusilaus says that he was
 earth-born. 12 He tethered her to the olive tree which was in the grove of
 the Mycenaeans. But Zeus ordered Hermes to steal the cow, and as Hermes could not do it secretly because Hierax
 had blabbed, he killed Argus by the cast of a stone 13 ; whence he was
 called Argiphontes. 14 Hera next sent a gadfly to infest the cow, 15 and the animal came first to what is called after her the Ionian gulf. Then
 she journeyed through Illyria and having traversed Mount Haemus she crossed what was then called the Thracian
 Straits but is now called after her the Bosphorus. 16 And having gone away
 to Scythia and the Cimmerian land she wandered over great tracts of land and swam wide stretches of sea both in
 Europe and Asia until at last she came to Egypt, where she recovered her original form and gave birth to a son
 Epaphus beside the river Nile. 17 Him Hera besought the Curetes to make
 away with, and make away with him they did. When Zeus learned of it, he slew the Curetes; but Io set out in
 search of the child. She roamed all over Syria, because there it was revealed to her that the wife of the king
 of Byblus was nursing her son 18 ; and having found Epaphus she came to
 Egypt and was married to Telegonus, who then reigned over the Egyptians. And she set up an image of Demeter,
 whom the Egyptians called Isis, 19 and Io likewise they called by the name
 of Isis. 20 

 [2.1.4] Reigning over the Egyptians Epaphus married Memphis, daughter of Nile, founded and named the city of
 Memphis after her, and begat a daughter Libya, after whom the region of Libya was called. 21 Libya had by Poseidon twin sons, Agenor and Belus. 22 Agenor departed to Phoenicia and reigned there, and there he became the
 ancestor of the great stock; hence we shall defer our account of him. 23 
 But Belus remained in Egypt, reigned over the country, and married Anchinoe, daughter of Nile, by whom he had
 twin sons, Egyptus and Danaus, 24 but according to Euripides, he had also
 Cepheus and Phineus. Danaus was settled by Belus in Libya, and Egyptus in Arabia; but Egyptus subjugated the
 country of the Melampods and named it Egypt <after himself>. Both had children by many wives; Egyptus had
 fifty sons, and Danaus fifty daughters. As they afterwards quarrelled concerning the kingdom, Danaus feared the
 sons of Egyptus, and by the advice of Athena he built a ship, being the first to do so, and having put his
 daughters on board he fled. And touching at Rhodes he set up the image of Lindian Athena. 25 Thence he came to Argos and the reigning king Gelanor surrendered the
 kingdom to him 26 ; ,and having made himself master of the country he named
 the inhabitants Danai after himself>. But the country being waterless, because Poseidon had dried up even the
 springs out of anger at Inachus for testifying that the land belonged to Hera, 27 Danaus sent his daughters to draw water. One of them, Amymone, in her
 search for water threw a dart at a deer and hit a sleeping satyr, and he, starting up, desired to force her; but
 Poseidon appearing on the scene, the satyr fled, and Amymone lay with Poseidon, and he revealed to her the
 springs at Lerna. 28 

 [2.1.5] But the sons of Egyptus came to Argos, and exhorted Danaus to lay aside his enmity, and begged to marry
 his daughters. Now Danaus distrusted their professions and bore them a grudge on account of his exile;
 nevertheless he consented to the marriage and allotted the damsels among them. 29 First, they picked out Hypermnestra as the eldest to be the wife of
 Lynceus, and Gorgophone to be the wife of Proteus; for Lynceus and Proteus had been borne to Egyptus by a woman
 of royal blood, Argyphia; but of the rest Busiris, Enceladus, Lycus, and Daiphron obtained by lot the daughters
 that had been borne to Danaus by Europe, to wit, Automate, Amymone, Agave, and Scaea. These daughters were borne
 to Danaus by a queen; but Gorgophone and Hypermnestra were borne to him by Elephantis. And Istrus got
 Hippodamia; Chalcodon got Rhodia; Agenor got Cleopatra; Chaetus got Asteria; Diocorystes got Hippodamia; Alces
 got Glauce; Alcmenor got Hippomedusa; Hippothous got Gorge; Euchenor got Iphimedusa; Hippolytus got Rhode. These
 ten sons were begotten on an Arabian woman; but the maidens were begotten on Hamadryad nymphs, some being
 daughters of Atlantia, and others of Phoebe. Agaptolemus got Pirene; Cercetes got Dorium; Eurydamas got Phartis;
 Aegius got Mnestra; Argius got Evippe; Archelaus got Anaxibia; Menemachus got Nelo. These seven sons were
 begotten on a Phoenician woman, and the maidens on an Ethiopian woman. The sons of Egyptus by Tyria got as their
 wives, without drawing lots, the daughters of Danaus by Memphis in virtue of the similarity of their names; thus
 Clitus got Clite; Sthenelus got Sthenele; Chrysippus got Chrysippe. The twelve sons of Egyptus by the Naiad
 nymph Caliadne cast lots for the daughters of Danaus by the Naiad nymph Polyxo: the sons were Eurylochus,
 Phantes, Peristhenes, Hermus, Dryas, Potamon, Cisseus, Lixus, Imbrus, Bromius, Polyctor, Chthonius; and the
 damsels were Autonoe, Theano, Electra, Cleopatra, Eurydice, Glaucippe, Anthelia, Cleodore, Evippe, Erato,
 Stygne, Bryce. The sons of Egyptus by Gorgo, cast lots for the daughters of Danaus by Pieria, and Periphas got
 Actaea, Oeneus got Podarce, Egyptus got Dioxippe, Menalces got Adite, Lampus got Ocypete, Idmon got Pylarge. The
 youngest sons of Egyptus were these: Idas got Hippodice; Daiphron got Adiante (the mother who bore these damsels
 was Herse); Pandion got Callidice; Arbelus got Oeme; Hyperbius got Celaeno; Hippocorystes got Hyperippe; the
 mother of these men was Hephaestine, and the mother of these damsels was Crino.

 When they had got their brides by lot, Danaus made a feast and gave his daughters daggers; and they slew their
 bridegrooms as they slept, all but Hypermnestra; for she saved Lynceus because he had respected her
 virginity 30 : wherefore Danaus shut her up and kept her under ward. But the
 rest of the daugters of Danaus buried the heads of their bridegrooms in Lerna 31 and paid funeral honors to their bodies in front of the city; and Athena
 and Hermes purified them at the command of Zeus. Danaus afterwards united Hypermnestra to Lynceus; and bestowed
 his other daughters on the victors in an athletic contest. 32 

 Amymone had a son Nauplius by Poseidon. 33 This Nauplius lived to a great
 age, and sailing the sea he used by beacon lights to lure to death such as he fell in with. 34 It came to pass, therefore, that he himself died by that very death. But
 before his death he married a wife; according to the tragic poets, she was Clymene, daughter of Catreus; but
 according to the author of The Returns , 35 she was Philyra; and
 according to Cercops she was Hesione. By her he had Palamedes, Oeax, and Nausimedon.

 [2.2.1] Lynceus reigned over Argos after Danaus and begat a son Abas by Hypermnestra; and Abas
 had twin sons Acrisius and Proetus 36 by Aglaia, daughter of Mantineus.
 These two quarrelled with each other while they were still in the womb, and when they were grown up they waged
 war for the kingdom, 37 and in the course of the war they were the first to
 invent shields. And Acrisius gained the mastery and drove Proetus from Argos; and Proetus went to Lycia to the
 court of Iobates or, as some say, of Amphianax, and married his daughter, whom Homer calls Antia, 38 but the tragic poets call her Stheneboea. 39 His in-law restored him to his own land with an army of Lycians, and he
 occupied Tiryns, which the Cyclopes had fortified for him. 40 They divided
 the whole of the Argive territory between them and settled in it, Acrisius reigning over Argos and Proetus over
 Tiryns.

 [2.2.2] And Acrisius had a daughter Danae by Eurydice, daughter of Lacedaemon, and Proetus had daughters,
 Lysippe, Iphinoe, and Iphianassa, by Stheneboea. When these damsels were grown up, they went mad, 41 according to Hesiod, because they would not accept the rites of Dionysus,
 but according to Acusilaus, because they disparaged the wooden image of Hera. In their madness they roamed over
 the whole Argive land, and afterwards, passing through Arcadia and the Peloponnese, they ran through the desert
 in the most disorderly fashion. But Melampus, son of Amythaon by Idomene, daughter of Abas, being a seer and the
 first to devise the cure by means of drugs and purifications, promised to cure the maidens if he should receive
 the third part of the sovereignty. When Proetus refused to pay so high a fee for the cure, the maidens raved
 more than ever, and besides that, the other women raved with them; for they also abandoned their houses,
 destroyed their own children, and flocked to the desert. Not until the evil had reached a very high pitch did
 Proetus consent to pay the stipulated fee, and Melampus promised to effect a cure whenever his brother Bias
 should receive just so much land as himself. Fearing that, if the cure were delayed, yet more would be demanded
 of him, Proetus agreed to let the physician proceed on these terms. So Melampus, taking with him the most
 stalwart of the young men, chased the women in a bevy from the mountains to Sicyon with shouts and a sort of
 frenzied dance. In the pursuit Iphinoe, the eldest of the daughters, expired; but the others were lucky enough
 to be purified and so to recover their wits. 42 Proetus gave them in
 marriage to Melampus and Bias, and afterwards begat a son, Megapenthes.

 [2.3.1] Bellerophon, son of Glaucus, son of Sisyphus, having accidentally killed his brother
 Deliades or, as some say, Piren, or, as others will have it, Alcimenes, came to Proetus and was purified. 43 And Stheneboea fell in love with him, 44 and sent him proposals for a meeting; and when he rejected them, she told
 Proetus that Bellerophon had sent her a vicious proposal. Proetus believed her, and gave him a letter to take to
 Iobates, in which it was written that he was to kill Bellerophon. Having read the letter, Iobates ordered him to
 kill the Chimera, believing that he would be destroyed by the beast, for it was more than a match for many, let
 alone one; it had the fore part of a lion, the tail of a dragon, and its third head, the middle one, was that of
 a goat, through which it belched fire. And it devastated the country and harried the cattle; for it was a single
 creature with the power of three beasts. It is said, too, that this Chimera was bred by Amisodarus, as Homer
 also affirms, 45 and that it was begotten by Typhon on Echidna, as Hesiod
 relates. 46 

 [2.3.2] So Bellerophon mounted his winged steed Pegasus, offspring of Medusa and Poseidon, and soaring on high
 shot down the Chimera from the height. 47 After that contest Iobates
 ordered him to fight the Solymi, and when he had finished that task also, he commanded him to combat the
 Amazons. And when he had killed them also, he picked out the reputed bravest of the Lycians and bade them lay an
 ambush and slay him. But when Bellerophon had killed them also to a man, Iobates, in admiration of his prowess,
 showed him the letter and begged him to stay with him; moreover he gave him his daughter Philonoe, 48 and dying bequeathed to him the kingdom.

 [2.4.1] When Acrisius inquired of the oracle how he should get male children, the god said that
 his daughter would give birth to a son who would kill him. 49 Fearing that,
 Acrisius built a brazen chamber under ground and there guarded Danae. 50 
 However, she was seduced, as some say, by Proetus, whence arose the quarrel between them 51 ; but some say that Zeus had intercourse with her in the shape of a stream
 of gold which poured through the roof into Danae's lap. When Acrisius afterwards learned that she had got a
 child Perseus, he would not believe that she had been seduced by Zeus, and putting his daughter with the child
 in a chest, he cast it into the sea. The chest was washed ashore on Seriphus, and Dictys took up the boy and
 reared him.

 [2.4.2] Polydectes, brother of Dictys, was then king of Seriphus and fell in love with Danae, but could not get
 access to her, because Perseus was grown to man's estate. So he called together his friends, including Perseus,
 under the pretext of collecting contributions towards a wedding gift for Hippodamia, daughter of
 Oenomaus. 52 Now Perseus having declared that he would not stick even at
 the Gorgon's head, Polydectes required the others to furnish horses, and not getting horses from Perseus ordered
 him to bring the Gorgon's head. So under the guidance of Hermes and Athena he made his way to the daughters of
 Phorcus, to wit, Enyo, Pephredo, and Dino; for Phorcus had them by Ceto, and they were sisters of the Gorgons,
 and old women from their birth. 53 The three had but one eye and one tooth,
 and these they passed to each other in turn. Perseus got possession of the eye and the tooth, and when they
 asked them back, he said he would give them up if they would show him the way to the nymphs. Now these nymphs
 had winged sandals and the kibisis, which they say was a wallet. [But Pindar and Hesiod in The Shield 
 say of Perseus: -- 54 “But all his back had on the head of a dread
 monster, <The Gorgon,> and round him ran the kibisis.”

 The kibisis is so called because dress and food are deposited in it.] 55 
 They had also the cap <of Hades>. When the Phorcides had shown him the way, he gave them back the tooth
 and the eye, and coming to the nymphs got what he wanted. So he slung the wallet (kibisis) about him, fitted the
 sandals to his ankles, and put the cap on his head. Wearing it, he saw whom he pleased, but was not seen by
 others. And having received also from Hermes an adamantine sickle he flew to the ocean and caught the Gorgons
 asleep. They were Stheno, Euryale, and Medusa. Now Medusa alone was mortal; for that reason Perseus was sent to
 fetch her head. But the Gorgons had heads twined about with the scales of dragons, and great tusks like swine's,
 and brazen hands, and golden wings, by which they flew; and they turned to stone such as beheld them. So Perseus
 stood over them as they slept, and while Athena guided his hand and he looked with averted gaze on a brazen
 shield, in which he beheld the image of the Gorgon, 56 he beheaded her.
 When her head was cut off, there sprang from the Gorgon the winged horse Pegasus and Chrysaor, the father of
 Geryon; these she had by Poseidon. 57 

 [2.4.3] So Perseus put the head of Medusa in the wallet (kibisis) and went back again; but the Gorgons started
 up from their slumber and pursued Perseus: but they could not see him on account of the cap, for he was hidden
 by it.

 Being come to Ethiopia, of which Cepheus was king, he found the king's daughter Andromeda set out to be the
 prey of a sea monster. 58 For Cassiepea, the wife of Cepheus, vied with the
 Nereids in beauty and boasted to be better than them all; hence the Nereids were angry, and Poseidon, sharing
 their wrath, sent a flood and a monster to invade the land. But Ammon having predicted deliverance from the
 calamity if Cassiepea's daughter Andromeda were exposed as a prey to the monster, Cepheus was compelled by the
 Ethiopians to do it, and he bound his daughter to a rock. When Perseus beheld her, he loved her and promised
 Cepheus that he would kill the monster, if he would give him the rescued damsel to wife. These terms having been
 sworn to, Perseus withstood and slew the monster and released Andromeda. However, Phineus, who was a brother of
 Cepheus, and to whom Andromeda had been first betrothed, plotted against him; but Perseus discovered the plot,
 and by showing the Gorgon turned him and his fellow conspirators at once into stone. And having come to Seriphus
 he found that his mother and Dictys had taken refuge at the altars on account of the violence of Polydectes; so
 he entered the palace, where Polydectes had gathered his friends, and with averted face he showed the Gorgon's
 head; and all who beheld it were turned to stone, each in the attitude which he happened to have struck. Having
 appointed Dictys king of Seriphus, he gave back the sandals and the wallet (kibisis) and the cap to Hermes, but
 the Gorgon's head he gave to Athena. Hermes restored the aforesaid things to the nymphs and Athena inserted the
 Gorgon's head in the middle of her shield. But it is alleged by some that Medusa was beheaded for Athena's sake;
 and they say that the Gorgon was fain to match herself with the goddess even in beauty.

 [2.4.4] Perseus hastened with Danae and Andromeda to Argos in order that he might behold Acrisius. But he,
 learning of this and dreading the oracle, 59 forsook Argos and departed to
 the Pelasgian land. Now Teutamides, king of Larissa, was holding athletic games in honor of his dead father, and
 Perseus came to compete. He engaged in the pentathlum, but in throwing the quoit he struck Acrisius on the foot
 and killed him instantly. 60 Perceiving that the oracle was fulfilled, he
 buried Acrisius outside the city, 61 and being ashamed to return to Argos
 to claim the inheritance of him who had died by his hand, he went to Megapenthes, son of Proetus, at Tiryns and
 effected an exchange with him, surrendering Argos into his hands. 62 So
 Megapenthes reigned over the Argives, and Perseus reigned over Tiryns, after fortifying also Midea and
 Mycenae. 63 

 [2.4.5] And he had sons by Andromeda: before he came to Greece he had Perses, whom he left behind with Cepheus
 (and from him it is said that the kings of Persia are descended); and in Mycenae he had Alcaeus and Sthenelus
 and Heleus and Mestor and Electryon, 64 and a daughter Gorgophone, whom
 Perieres married. 65 

 Alcaeus had a son Amphitryon and a daughter Anaxo by Astydamia, daughter of Pelops; but some say he had them by
 Laonome, daughter of Guneus, others that he had them by Hipponome, daughter of Menoeceus; and Mestor had
 Hippothoe by Lysidice, daughter of Pelops. This Hippothoe was carried off by Poseidon, who brought her to the
 Echinadian Islands, and there had intercourse with her, and begat Taphius, who colonized Taphos and called the
 people Teleboans, because he had gone far 66 from his native land. And
 Taphius had a son Pterelaus, whom Poseidon made immortal by implanting a golden hair in his head. 67 And to Pterelaus were born sons, to wit, Chromius, Tyrannus, Antiochus,
 Chersidamas, Mestor, and Eueres.

 Electryon married Anaxo, daughter of Alcaeus, 68 and begat a daughter
 Alcmena, 69 and sons, to wit, Stratobates, Gorgophonus, Phylonomus,
 Celaeneus, Amphimachus, Lysinomus, Chirimachus, Anactor, and Archelaus; and after these he had also a bastard
 son, Licymnius, by a Phrygian woman Midea. 70 

 Sthenelus had daughters, Alcyone and Medusa, by Nicippe, 71 daughter of
 Pelops; and he had afterwards a son Eurystheus, who reigned also over Mycenae. For when Hercules was about to be
 born, Zeus declared among the gods that the descendant of Perseus then about to be born would reign over
 Mycenae, and Hera out of jealousy persuaded the Ilithyias to retard Alcmena's delivery, 72 and contrived that Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus, should be born a
 seven-month child. 73 

 [2.4.6] When Electryon reigned over Mycenae, the sons of Pterelaus came with some Taphians and claimed the
 kingdom of Mestor, their maternal grandfather, 74 and as Electryon paid no
 heed to the claim, they drove away his kine; and when the sons of Electryon stood on their defence, they
 challenged and slew each other. 75 But of the sons of Electryon there
 survived Licymnius, who was still young; and of the sons of Pterelaus there survived Everes, who guarded the
 ships. Those of the Taphians who escaped sailed away, taking with them the cattle they had lifted, and entrusted
 them to Polyxenus, king of the Eleans; but Amphitryon ransomed them from Polyxenus and brought them to Mycenae.
 Wishing to avenge his sons' death, Electryon purposed to make war on the Teleboans, but first he committed the
 kingdom to Amphitryon along with his daughter Alcmena, binding him by oath to keep her a virgin until his
 return. 76 However, as he was receiving the cows back, one of them charged,
 and Amphitryon threw at her the club which he had in his hands. But the club rebounded from the cow's horns and
 striking Electryon's head killed him. 77 Hence Sthenelus laid hold of this
 pretext to banish Amphitryon from the whole of Argos, while he himself seized the throne of Mycenae and Tiryns;
 and he entrusted Midea to Atreus and Thyestes, the sons of Pelops, whom he had sent for. 

 Amphitryon went with Alcmena and Licymnius to Thebes and was purified by Creon 78 and gave his sister Perimede to Licymnius. And as Alcmena said she would
 marry him when he had avenged her brothers' death, Amphitryon engaged to do so, and undertook an expedition
 against the Teleboans, and invited Creon to assist him. Creon said he would join in the expedition if Amphitryon
 would first rid the Cadmea of the vixen; for a brute of a vixen was ravaging the Cadmea. 79 But though Amphitryon undertook the task, it was fated that nobody should
 catch her.

 [2.4.7] As the country suffered thereby, the Thebans every month exposed a son of one of the citizens to the
 brute, which would have carried off many if that were not done. So Amphitryon betook him to Cephalus, son of
 Deioneus, at Athens, and persuaded him, in return for a share of the Teleboan spoils, to bring to the chase the
 dog which Procris had brought from Crete as a gift from Minos 80 ; for that
 dog was destined to catch whatever it pursued. So then, when the vixen was chased by the dog, Zeus turned both
 of them into stone. Supported by his allies, to wit, Cephalus from Thoricus in Attica, Panopeus from Phocis,
 Heleus, son of Perseus, from Helos in Argolis, and Creon from Thebes, Amphitryon ravaged the islands of the
 Taphians. Now, so long as Pterelaus lived, he could not take Taphos; but when Comaetho, daughter of Pterelaus,
 falling in love with Amphitryon, pulled out the golden hair from her father's head, Pterelaus died, 81 and Amphitryon subjugated all the islands. He slew Comaetho, and sailed
 with the booty to Thebes, 82 and gave the islands to Heleus and Cephalus;
 and they founded cities named after themselves and dwelt in them.

 [2.4.8] But before Amphitryon reached Thebes, Zeus came by night and prolonging the one
 night threefold he assumed the likeness of Amphitryon and bedded with Alcmena 83 and related what had happened concerning the Teleboans. But when Amphitryon
 arrived and saw that he was not welcomed by his wife, he inquired the cause; and when she told him that he had
 come the night before and slept with her, he learned from Tiresias how Zeus had enjoyed her. And Alcmena bore
 two sons, to wit, Hercules, whom she had by Zeus and who was the elder by one night, and Iphicles, whom she had
 by Amphitryon. When the child was eight months old, Hera desired the destruction of the babe and sent two huge
 serpents to the bed. Alcmena called Amphitryon to her help, but Hercules arose and killed the serpents by
 strangling them with both his hands. 84 However, Pherecydes says that it
 was Amphitryon who put the serpents in the bed, because he would know which of the two children was his, and
 that when Iphicles fled, and Hercules stood his ground, he knew that Iphicles was begotten of his body.

 [2.4.9] Hercules was taught to drive a chariot by Amphitryon, to wrestle by Autolycus, to shoot with the bow by
 Eurytus, to fence by Castor, and to play the lyre by Linus. 85 This Linus
 was a brother of Orpheus; he came to Thebes and became a Theban, but was killed by Hercules with a blow of the
 lyre; for being struck by him, Hercules flew into a rage and slew him. 86 
 When he was tried for murder, Hercules quoted a law of Rhadamanthys, who laid it down that whoever defends
 himself against a wrongful aggressor shall go free, and so he was acquitted. But fearing he might do the like
 again, Amphitryon sent him to the cattle farm; and there he was nurtured and outdid all in stature and strength.
 Even by the look of him it was plain that he was a son of Zeus; for his body measured four cubits, 87 and he flashed a gleam of fire from his eyes; and he did not miss, neither
 with the bow nor with the javelin.

 While he was with the herds and had reached his eighteenth year he slew the lion of Cithaeron, for that animal,
 sallying from Cithaeron, harried the kine of Amphitryon and of Thespius. 88 

 [2.4.10] Now this Thespius was king of Thespiae, and Hercules went to him when he wished to catch the lion. The
 king entertained him for fifty days, and each night, as Hercules went forth to the hunt, Thespius bedded one of
 his daughters with him (fifty daughters having been borne to him by Megamede, daughter of Arneus); for he was
 anxious that all of them should have children by Hercules. Thus Hercules, though he thought that his bed-fellow
 was always the same, had intercourse with them all. 89 And having
 vanquished the lion, he dressed himself in the skin and wore the scalp 90 
 as a helmet.

 [2.4.11] As he was returning from the hunt, there met him heralds sent by Erginus to receive the tribute from
 the Thebans. 91 Now the Thebans paid tribute to Erginus for the following
 reason. Clymenus, king of the Minyans, was wounded with a cast of a stone by a charioteer of Menoeceus, named
 Perieres, in a precinct of Poseidon at Onchestus; and being carried dying to Orchomenus, he with his last breath
 charged his son Erginus to avenge his death. So Erginus marched against Thebes, and after slaughtering not a few
 of the Thebans he concluded a treaty with them, confirmed by oaths, that they should send him tribute for twenty
 years, a hundred kine every year. Falling in with the heralds on their way to Thebes to demand this tribute,
 Hercules outraged them; for he cut off their ears and noses and hands, and having fastened them by ropes from
 their necks, he told them to carry that tribute to Erginus and the Minyans. Indignant at this outrage, Erginus
 marched against Thebes. But Hercules, having received weapons from Athena and taken the command, killed Erginus,
 put the Minyans to flight, and compelled them to pay double the tribute to the Thebans. And it chanced that in
 the fight Amphitryon fell fighting bravely. And Hercules received from Creon his eldest daughter Megara as a
 prize of valor, 92 and by her he had three sons, Therimachus, Creontiades,
 and Deicoon. But Creon gave his younger daughter to Iphicles, who already had a son Iolaus by Automedusa,
 daughter of Alcathus. And Rhadamanthys, son of Zeus, married Alcmena after the death of Amphitryon, and dwelt as
 an exile at Ocaleae in Boeotia. 93 

 Having first learned from Eurytus the art of archery, 94 Hercules received
 a sword from Hermes, a bow and arrows from Apollo, 95 a golden breastplate
 from Hephaestus, and a robe from Athena; for he had himself cut a club at Nemea.

 [2.4.12] Now it came to pass that after the battle with the Minyans Hercules was driven mad through the
 jealousy of Hera and flung his own children, whom he had by Megara, and two children of Iphicles into the
 fire 96 ; wherefore he condemned himself to exile, and was purified by
 Thespius, and repairing to Delphi he inquired of the god where he should dwell. 97 The Pythian priestess then first called him Hercules, for hitherto he was
 called Alcides. 98 And she told him to dwell in Tiryns, serving Eurystheus
 for twelve years and to perform the ten labours imposed on him, and so, she said, when the tasks were
 accomplished, he would be immortal. 99 

 [2.5.1] When Hercules heard that, he went to Tiryns and did as he was bid by Eurystheus. First,
 Eurystheus ordered him to bring the skin of the Nemean lion 100 ; now that
 was an invulnerable beast begotten by Typhon. On his way to attack the lion he came to Cleonae and lodged at the
 house of a day-laborer, Molorchus 101 ; and when his host would have
 offered a victim in sacrifice, Hercules told him to wait for thirty days, and then, if he had returned safe from
 the hunt, to sacrifice to Saviour Zeus, but if he were dead, to sacrifice to him as to a hero. 102 And having come to Nemea and tracked the lion, he first shot an arrow at
 him, but when he perceived that the beast was invulnerable, he heaved up his club and made after him. And when
 the lion took refuge in a cave with two mouths, Hercules built up the one entrance and came in upon the beast
 through the other, and putting his arm round its neck held it tight till he had choked it; so laying it on his
 shoulders he carried it to Cleonae. And finding Molorchus on the last of the thirty days about to sacrifice the
 victim to him as to a dead man, he sacrificed to Saviour Zeus and brought the lion to Mycenae. Amazed at his
 manhood, Eurystheus forbade him thenceforth to enter the city, but ordered him to exhibit the fruits of his
 labours before the gates. They say, too, that in his fear he had a bronze jar made for himself to hide in under
 the earth, 103 and that he sent his commands for the labours through a
 herald, Copreus, 104 son of Pelops the Elean. This Copreus had killed
 Iphitus and fled to Mycenae, where he was purified by Eurystheus and took up his abode.

 [2.5.2] As a second labour he ordered him to kill the Lernaean hydra. 105 
 That creature, bred in the swamp of Lerna, used to go forth into the plain and ravage both the cattle and the
 country. Now the hydra had a huge body, with nine heads, eight mortal, but the middle one immortal. So mounting
 a chariot driven by Iolaus, he came to Lerna, and having halted his horses, he discovered the hydra on a hill
 beside the springs of the Amymone, where was its den. By pelting it with fiery shafts he forced it to come out,
 and in the act of doing so he seized and held it fast. But the hydra wound itself about one of his feet and
 clung to him. Nor could he effect anything by smashing its heads with his club, for as fast as one head was
 smashed there grew up two. A huge crab also came to the help of the hydra by biting his foot. 106 So he killed it, and in his turn called for help on Iolaus who, by
 setting fire to a piece of the neighboring wood and burning the roots of the heads with the brands, prevented
 them from sprouting. Having thus got the better of the sprouting heads, he chopped off the immortal head, and
 buried it, and put a heavy rock on it, beside the road that leads through Lerna to Elaeus. But the body of the
 hydra he slit up and dipped his arrows in the gall. However, Eurystheus said that this labour should not be
 reckoned among the ten because he had not got the better of the hydra by himself, but with the help of Iolaus.

 [2.5.3] As a third labour he ordered him to bring the Cerynitian hind alive to Mycenae. 107 Now the hind was at Oenoe; it had golden horns and was sacred to Artemis;
 so wishing neither to kill nor wound it, Hercules hunted it a whole year. But when, weary with the chase, the
 beast took refuge on the mountain called Artemisius, and thence passed to the river Ladon, Hercules shot it just
 as it was about to cross the stream, and catching it put it on his shoulders and hastened through Arcadia. But
 Artemis with Apollo met him, and would have wrested the hind from him, and rebuked him for attempting to kill
 her sacred animal. 108 Howbeit, by pleading necessity and laying the blame
 on Eurystheus, he appeased the anger of the goddess and carried the beast alive to Mycenae. 

 [2.5.4] As a fourth labour he ordered him to bring the Erymanthian boar alive 109 ; now that animal ravaged Psophis, sallying from a mountain which they
 call Erymanthus. So passing through Pholoe he was entertained by the centaur Pholus, a son of Silenus by a
 Melian nymph. 110 He set roast meat before Hercules, while he himself ate
 his meat raw. When Hercules called for wine, he said he feared to open the jar which belonged to the centaurs in
 common. 111 But Hercules, bidding him be of good courage, opened it, and
 not long afterwards, scenting the smell, the centaurs arrived at the cave of Pholus, armed with rocks and firs.
 The first who dared to enter, Anchius and Agrius, were repelled by Hercules with a shower of brands, and the
 rest of them he shot and pursued as far as Malea. Thence they took refuge with Chiron, who, driven by the
 Lapiths from Mount Pelion, took up his abode at Malea. As the centaurs cowered about Chiron, Hercules shot an
 arrow at them, which, passing through the arm of Elatus, stuck in the knee of Chiron. Distressed at this,
 Hercules ran up to him, drew out the shaft, and applied a medicine which Chiron gave him. But the hurt proving
 incurable, Chiron retired to the cave and there he wished to die, but he could not, for he was immortal.
 However, Prometheus offered himself to Zeus to be immortal in his stead, and so Chiron died. The rest of the
 centaurs fled in different directions, and some came to Mount Malea, and Eurytion to Pholoe, and Nessus to the
 river Evenus. The rest of them Poseidon received at Eleusis and hid them in a mountain. But Pholus, drawing the
 arrow from a corpse, wondered that so little a thing could kill such big fellows; howbeit, it slipped from his
 hand and lighting on his foot killed him on the spot. 112 So when Hercules
 returned to Pholoe, he beheld Pholus dead; and he buried him and proceeded to the boar hunt. And when he had
 chased the boar with shouts from a certain thicket, he drove the exhausted animal into deep snow, trapped it,
 and brought it to Mycenae.

 [2.5.5] The fifth labour he laid on him was to carry out the dung of the cattle of Augeas in a single
 day. 113 Now Augeas was king of Elis; some say that he was a son of the
 Sun, others that he was a son of Poseidon, and others that he was a son of Phorbas; and he had many herds of
 cattle. Hercules accosted him, and without revealing the command of Eurystheus, said that he would carry out the
 dung in one day, if Augeas would give him the tithe of the cattle. Augeas was incredulous, but promised. Having
 taken Augeas's son Phyleus to witness, Hercules made a breach in the foundations of the cattle-yard, and then,
 diverting the courses of the Alpheus and Peneus, which flowed near each other, he turned them into the yard,
 having first made an outlet for the water through another opening. When Augeas learned that this had been
 accomplished at the command of Eurystheus, he would not pay the reward; nay more, he denied that he had promised
 to pay it, and on that point he professed himself ready to submit to arbitration. The arbitrators having taken
 their seats, Phyleus was called by Hercules and bore witness against his father, affirming that he had agreed to
 give him a reward. In a rage Augeas, before the voting took place, ordered both Phyleus and Hercules to pack out
 of Elis. So Phyleus went to Dulichium and dwelt there, 114 and Hercules
 repaired to Dexamenus at Olenus. 115 He found Dexamenus on the point of
 betrothing perforce his daughter Mnesimache to the centaur Eurytion, and being called upon by him for help, he
 slew Eurytion when that centaur came to fetch his bride. But Eurystheus would not admit this labour either among
 the ten, alleging that it had been performed for hire.

 [2.5.6] The sixth labour he enjoined on him was to chase away the Stymphalian birds. 116 Now at the city of Stymphalus in Arcadia was the lake called Stymphalian,
 embosomed in a deep wood. To it countless birds had flocked for refuge, fearing to be preyed upon by the
 wolves. 117 So when Hercules was at a loss how to drive the birds from the
 wood, Athena gave him brazen castanets, which she had received from Hephaestus. By clashing these on a certain
 mountain that overhung the lake, he scared the birds. They could not abide the sound, but fluttered up in a
 fright, and in that way Hercules shot them.

 [2.5.7] The seventh labour he enjoined on him was to bring the Cretan bull. 118 Acusilaus says that this was the bull that ferried across Europa for
 Zeus; but some say it was the bull that Poseidon sent up from the sea when Minos promised to sacrifice to
 Poseidon what should appear out of the sea. And they say that when he saw the beauty of the bull he sent it away
 to the herds and sacrificed another to Poseidon; at which the god was angry and made the bull savage. To attack
 this bull Hercules came to Crete, and when, in reply to his request for aid, Minos told him to fight and catch
 the bull for himself, he caught it and brought it to Eurystheus, and having shown it to him he let it afterwards
 go free. But the bull roamed to Sparta and all Arcadia, and traversing the Isthmus arrived at Marathon in Attica
 and harried the inhabitants.

 [2.5.8] The eighth labour he enjoined on him was to bring the mares of Diomedes the Thracian to Mycenae. 119 Now this Diomedes was a son of Ares and Cyrene, and he was king of the
 Bistones, a very warlike Thracian people, and he owned man-eating mares. So Hercules sailed with a band of
 volunteers, and having overpowered the grooms who were in charge of the mangers, he drove the mares to the sea.
 When the Bistones in arms came to the rescue, he committed the mares to the guardianship of Abderus, who was a
 son of Hermes, a native of Opus in Locris, and a minion of Hercules; but the mares killed him by dragging him
 after them. But Hercules fought against the Bistones, slew Diomedes and compelled the rest to flee. And he
 founded a city Abdera beside the grave of Abderus who had been done to death, 120 and bringing the mares he gave them to Eurystheus. But Eurystheus let
 them go, and they came to Mount Olympus, as it is called, and there they were destroyed by the wild beasts.

 [2.5.9] The ninth labour he enjoined on Hercules was to bring the belt of Hippolyte. 121 She was queen of the Amazons, who dwelt about the river Thermodon, a
 people great in war; for they cultivated the manly virtues, and if ever they gave birth to children through
 intercourse with the other sex, they reared the females; and they pinched off the right breasts that they might
 not be trammelled by them in throwing the javelin, but they kept the left breasts, that they might suckle. Now
 Hippolyte had the belt of Ares in token of her superiority to all the rest. Hercules was sent to fetch this belt
 because Admete, daughter of Eurystheus, desired to get it. So taking with him a band of volunteer comrades in a
 single ship he set sail and put in to the island of Paros, which was inhabited by the sons of Minos, 122 to wit, Eurymedon, Chryses, Nephalion, and Philolaus. But it chanced that
 two of those in the ship landed and were killed by the sons of Minos. Indignant at this, Hercules killed the
 sons of Minos on the spot and besieged the rest closely, till they sent envoys to request that in the room of
 the murdered men he would take two, whom he pleased. So he raised the siege, and taking on board the sons of
 Androgeus, son of Minos, to wit, Alcaeus and Sthenelus, he came to Mysia, to the court of Lycus, son of
 Dascylus, and was entertained by him; and in a battle between him and the king of the Bebryces Hercules sided
 with Lycus and slew many, amongst others King Mygdon, brother of Amycus. And he took much land from the Bebryces
 and gave it to Lycus, who called it all Heraclea. 

 Having put in at the harbor of Themiscyra, he received a visit from Hippolyte, who inquired why he was come,
 and promised to give him the belt. But Hera in the likeness of an Amazon went up and down the multitude saying
 that the strangers who had arrived were carrying off the queen. So the Amazons in arms charged on horseback down
 on the ship. But when Hercules saw them in arms, he suspected treachery, and killing Hippolyte stripped her of
 her belt. And after fighting the rest he sailed away and touched at Troy. 

 But it chanced that the city was then in distress consequently on the wrath of Apollo and Poseidon. For
 desiring to put the wantonness of Laomedon to the proof, Apollo and Poseidon assumed the likeness of men and
 undertook to fortify Pergamum for wages. 123 But when they had fortified
 it, he would not pay them their wages. Therefore Apollo sent a pestilence, and Poseidon a sea monster, which,
 carried up by a flood, snatched away the people of the plain. But as oracles foretold deliverance from these
 calamities if Laomedon would expose his daughter Hesione to be devoured by the sea monster, he exposed her by
 fastening her to the rocks near the sea. 124 Seeing her exposed, Hercules
 promised to save her on condition of receiving from Laomedon the mares which Zeus had given in compensation for
 the rape of Ganymede. 125 On Laomedon's saying that he would give them,
 Hercules killed the monster and saved Hesione. But when Laomedon would not give the stipulated reward, 126 Hercules put to sea after threatening to make war on Troy. 127 

 And he touched at Aenus, where he was entertained by Poltys. And as he was sailing away he shot and killed on
 the Aenian beach a lewd fellow, Sarpedon, son of Poseidon and brother of Poltys. And having come to Thasos and
 subjugated the Thracians who dwelt in the island, he gave it to the sons of Androgeus to dwell in. From Thasos
 he proceeded to Torone, and there, being challenged to wrestle by Polygonus and Telegonus, sons of Proteus, son
 of Poseidon, he killed them in the wrestling match. 128 And having brought
 the belt to Mycenae he gave it to Eurystheus. 

 [2.5.10] As a tenth labour he was ordered to fetch the kine of Geryon from Erythia. 129 Now Erythia was an island near the ocean; it is now called Gadira. 130 This island was inhabited by Geryon, son of Chrysaor by Callirrhoe,
 daughter of Ocean. He had the body of three men grown together and joined in one at the waist, but parted in
 three from the flanks and thighs. 131 He owned red kine, of which Eurytion
 was the herdsman and Orthus, 132 the two-headed hound, begotten by Typhon
 on Echidna, was the watchdog. So journeying through Europe to fetch the kine of Geryon he destroyed many wild
 beasts and set foot in Libya, 133 and proceeding to Tartessus he erected
 as tokens of his journey two pillars over against each other at the boundaries of Europe and Libya. 134 But being heated by the Sun on his journey, he bent his bow at the god,
 who in admiration of his hardihood, gave him a golden goblet in which he crossed the ocean. 135 And having reached Erythia he lodged on Mount Abas. However the dog,
 perceiving him, rushed at him; but he smote it with his club, and when the herdsman Eurytion came to the help of
 the dog, Hercules killed him also. But Menoetes, who was there pasturing the kine of Hades, reported to Geryon
 what had occurred, and he, coming up with Hercules beside the river Anthemus, 136 as he was driving away the kine, joined battle with him and was shot
 dead. And Hercules, embarking the kine in the goblet and sailing across to Tartessus, gave back the goblet to
 the Sun.

 And passing through Abderia 137 he came to Liguria, 138 where Ialebion and Dercynus, sons of Poseidon, attempted to rob him of
 the kine, but he killed them 139 and went on his way through Tyrrhenia.
 But at Rhegium a bull broke away 140 and hastily plunging into the sea
 swam across to Sicily, and having passed through the neighboring country since called Italy after it, for the
 Tyrrhenians called the bull italus , 141 came to the plain of
 Eryx, who reigned over the Elymi. 142 Now Eryx was a son of Poseidon, and
 he mingled the bull with his own herds. So Hercules entrusted the kine to Hephaestus and hurried away in search
 of the bull. He found it in the herds of Eryx, and when the king refused to surrender it unless Hercules should
 beat him in a wrestling bout, Hercules beat him thrice, killed him in the wrestling, and taking the bull drove
 it with the rest of the herd to the Ionian Sea. But when he came to the creeks of the sea, Hera afflicted the
 cows with a gadfly, and they dispersed among the skirts of the mountains of Thrace. Hercules went in pursuit,
 and having caught some, drove them to the Hellespont; but the remainder were thenceforth wild. 143 Having with difficulty collected the cows, Hercules blamed the river
 Strymon, and whereas it had been navigable before, he made it unnavigable by filling it with rocks; and he
 conveyed the kine and gave them to Eurystheus, who sacrificed them to Hera.

 [2.5.11] When the labours had been performed in eight years and a month, 144 Eurystheus ordered Hercules, as an eleventh labour, to fetch golden
 apples from the Hesperides, 145 for he did not acknowledge the labour of
 the cattle of Augeas nor that of the hydra. These apples were not, as some have said, in Libya, but on Atlas
 among the Hyperboreans. 146 They were presented <by Earth> to Zeus
 after his marriage with Hera, and guarded by an immortal dragon with a hundred heads, offspring of Typhon and
 Echidna, which spoke with many and divers sorts of voices. With it the Hesperides also were on guard, to wit,
 Aegle, Erythia, Hesperia, and Arethusa. So journeying he came to the river Echedorus. And Cycnus, son of Ares
 and Pyrene, challenged him to single combat. Ares championed the cause of Cycnus and marshalled the combat, but
 a thunderbolt was hurled between the two and parted the combatants. 147 
 And going on foot through Illyria and hastening to the river Eridanus he came to the nymphs, the daughters of
 Zeus and Themis. They revealed Nereus to him, and Hercules seized him while he slept, and though the god turned
 himself into all kinds of shapes, the hero bound him and did not release him till he had learned from him where
 were the apples and the Hesperides. 148 Being informed, he traversed
 Libya. That country was then ruled by Antaeus, son of Poseidon, 149 who
 used to kill strangers by forcing them to wrestle. Being forced to wrestle with him, Hercules hugged him, lifted
 him aloft, 150 broke and killed him; for when he touched earth so it was
 that he waxed stronger, wherefore some said that he was a son of Earth. 

 After Libya he traversed Egypt. That country was then ruled by Busiris, 151 a son of Poseidon by Lysianassa, daughter of Epaphus. This Busiris used
 to sacrifice strangers on an altar of Zeus in accordance with a certain oracle. For Egypt was visited with
 dearth for nine years, and Phrasius, a learned seer who had come from Cyprus, said that the dearth would cease
 if they slaughtered a stranger man in honor of Zeus every year. Busiris began by slaughtering the seer himself
 and continued to slaughter the strangers who landed. So Hercules also was seized and haled to the altars, but he
 burst his bonds and slew both Busiris and his son Amphidamas. 152 

 And traversing Asia he put in to Thermydrae, the harbor of the Lindians. 153 And having loosed one of the bullocks from the cart of a cowherd, he
 sacrificed it and feasted. But the cowherd, unable to protect himself, stood on a certain mountain and cursed.
 Wherefore to this day, when they sacrifice to Hercules, they do it with curses. 154 

 And passing by Arabia he slew Emathion, son of Tithonus, 155 and
 journeying through Libya to the outer sea he received the goblet from the Sun. And having crossed to the
 opposite mainland he shot on the Caucasus the eagle, offspring of Echidna and Typhon, that was devouring the
 liver of Prometheus, and he released Prometheus, 156 after choosing for
 himself the bond of olive, 157 and to Zeus he presented Chiron, who,
 though immortal, consented to die in his stead.

 Now Prometheus had told Hercules not to go himself after the apples but to send Atlas, first relieving him of
 the burden of the sphere; so when he was come to Atlas in the land of the Hyperboreans, he took the advice and
 relieved Atlas. But when Atlas had received three apples from the Hesperides, he came to Hercules, and not
 wishing to support the sphere <he said that he would himself carry the apples to Eurystheus, and bade
 Hercules hold up the sky in his stead. Hercules promised to do so, but succeeded by craft in putting it on Atlas
 instead. For at the advice of Prometheus he begged Atlas to hold up the sky till he should> 158 put a pad on his head. When Atlas heard that, he laid the apples down on
 the ground and took the sphere from Hercules. And so Hercules picked up the apples and departed. But some say
 that he did not get them from Atlas, but that he plucked the apples himself after killing the guardian snake.
 And having brought the apples he gave them to Eurystheus. But he, on receiving them, bestowed them on Hercules,
 from whom Athena got them and conveyed them back again; for it was not lawful that they should be laid down
 anywhere.

 [2.5.12] A twelfth labour imposed on Hercules was to bring Cerberus from Hades. 159 Now this Cerberus had three heads of dogs, the tail of a dragon, and on
 his back the heads of all sorts of snakes. When Hercules was about to depart to fetch him, he went to Eumolpus
 at Eleusis, wishing to be initiated. However it was not then lawful for foreigners to be initiated: since he
 proposed to be initiated as the adoptive son of Pylius. But not being able to see the mysteries because he had
 not been cleansed of the slaughter of the centaurs, he was cleansed by Eumolpus and then initiated. 160 And having come to Taenarum in Laconia, where is the mouth of the descent
 to Hades, he descended through it. 161 But when the souls saw him, they
 fled, save Meleager and the Gorgon Medusa. And Hercules drew his sword against the Gorgon, as if she were alive,
 but he learned from Hermes that she was an empty phantom. 162 And being
 come near to the gates of Hades he found Theseus and Pirithous, 163 him
 who wooed Persephone in wedlock and was therefore bound fast. And when they beheld Hercules, they stretched out
 their hands as if they should be raised from the dead by his might. And Theseus, indeed, he took by the hand and
 raised up, but when he would have brought up Pirithous, the earth quaked and he let go. And he rolled away also
 the stone of Ascalaphus. 164 And wishing to provide the souls with blood,
 he slaughtered one of the kine of Hades. But Menoetes, son of Ceuthonymus, who tended the king, challenged
 Hercules to wrestle, and, being seized round the middle, had his ribs broken 165 ; howbeit, he was let off at the request of Persephone. When Hercules
 asked Pluto for Cerberus, Pluto ordered him to take the animal provided he mastered him without the use of the
 weapons which he carried. Hercules found him at the gates of Acheron, and, cased in his cuirass and covered by
 the lion's skin, he flung his arms round the head of the brute, and though the dragon in its tail bit him, he
 never relaxed his grip and pressure till it yielded. 166 So he carried it
 off and ascended through Troezen. 167 But Demeter turned Ascalaphus into a
 short-eared owl, 168 and Hercules, after showing Cerberus to Eurystheus,
 carried him back to Hades.

 [2.6.1] After his labours Hercules went to Thebes and gave Megara to Iolaus, 169 and, wishing himself to wed, he ascertained that Eurytus, prince of
 Oechalia, had proposed the hand of his daughter Iole as a prize to him who should vanquish himself and his sons
 in archery. 170 So he came to Oechalia, and though he proved himself
 better than them at archery, yet he did not get the bride; for while Iphitus, the elder of Eurytus's sons, said
 that Iole should be given to Hercules, Eurytus and the others refused, and said they feared that, if he got
 children, he would again kill his offspring. 171 

 [2.6.2] Not long after, some cattle were stolen from Euboea by Autolycus, and Eurytus supposed that it was done
 by Hercules; but Iphitus did not believe it and went to Hercules. And meeting him, as he came from Pherae after
 saving the dead Alcestis for Admetus, he invited him to seek the kine with him. Hercules promised to do so and
 entertained him; but going mad again he threw him from the walls of Tiryns. 172 Wishing to be purified of the murder he repaired to Neleus, who was
 prince of the Pylians. And when Neleus rejected his request on the score of his friendship with Eurytus, he went
 to Amyclae and was purified by Deiphobus, son of Hippolytus. 173 But being
 afflicted with a dire disease on account of the murder of Iphitus he went to Delphi and inquired how he might be
 rid of the disease. As the Pythian priestess answered him not by oracles, he was fain to plunder the temple,
 and, carrying off the tripod, to institute an oracle of his own. But Apollo fought him, 174 and Zeus threw a thunderbolt between them. When they had thus been
 parted, Hercules received an oracle, which declared that the remedy for his disease was for him to be sold, and
 to serve for three years, and to pay compensation for the murder to Eurytus.

 [2.6.3] After the delivery of the oracle, Hermes sold Hercules, and he was bought by Omphale, 175 daughter of Iardanes, queen of Lydia, to whom at his death her husband
 Tmolus had bequeathed the government. Eurytus did not accept the compensation when it was presented to him, but
 Hercules served Omphale as a slave, and in the course of his servitude he seized and bound the Cercopes at
 Ephesus 176 ; and as for Syleus in Aulis, who compelled passing strangers
 to dig, Hercules killed him with his daughter Xenodoce, after burning the vines with the roots. 177 And having put in to the island of Doliche, he saw the body of Icarus
 washed ashore and buried it, and he called the island Icaria instead of Doliche. In return Daedalus made a
 portrait statue of Hercules at Pisa, which Hercules mistook at night for living and threw a stone and hit it.
 And during the time of his servitude with Omphale it is said that the voyage to Colchis 178 and the hunt of the Calydonian boar took place, and that Theseus on his
 way from Troezen cleared the Isthmus of malefactors.

 [2.6.4] After his servitude, being rid of his disease he mustered an army of noble volunteers and sailed for
 Ilium with eighteen ships of fifty oars each. 179 And having come to port
 at Ilium, he left the guard of the ships to Oicles 180 and himself with
 the rest of the champions set out to attack the city. Howbeit Laomedon marched against the ships with the
 multitude and slew Oicles in battle, but being repulsed by the troops of Hercules, he was besieged. The siege
 once laid, Telamon was the first to breach the wall and enter the city, and after him Hercules. But when he saw
 that Telamon had entered it first, he drew his sword and rushed at him, loath that anybody should be reputed a
 better man than himself. Perceiving that, Telamon collected stones that lay to hand, and when Hercules asked him
 what he did, he said he was building an altar to Hercules the Glorious Victor. 181 Hercules thanked him, and when he had taken the city and shot down
 Laomedon and his sons, except Podarces, he assigned Laomedon's daughter Hesione as a prize to Telamon 182 and allowed her to take with her whomsoever of the captives she would.
 When she chose her brother Podarces, Hercules said that he must first be a slave and then be ransomed by her. So
 when he was being sold she took the veil from her head and gave it as a ransom; hence Podarces was called
 Priam. 183 

 [2.7.1] When Hercules was sailing from Troy, Hera sent grievous storms, 184 which so vexed Zeus that he hung her from Olympus. 185 Hercules sailed to Cos, 186 and the
 Coans, thinking he was leading a piratical squadron, endeavored to prevent his approach by a shower of stones.
 But he forced his way in and took the city by night, and slew the king, Eurypylus, son of Poseidon by
 Astypalaea. And Hercules was wounded in the battle by Chalcedon; but Zeus snatched him away, so that he took no
 harm. And having laid waste Cos, he came through Athena's agency to Phlegra, and sided with the gods in their
 victorious war on the giants. 187 

 [2.7.2] Not long afterwards he collected an Arcadian army, and being joined by volunteers from the first men in
 Greece he marched against Augeas. 188 But Augeas, hearing of the war that
 Hercules was levying, appointed Eurytus and Cteatus 189 generals of the
 Eleans. They were two men joined in one, who surpassed all of that generation in strength and were sons of Actor
 by Molione, though their father was said to be Poseidon; now Actor was a brother of Augeas. But it came to pass
 that on the expedition Hercules fell sick; hence he concluded a truce with the Molionides. But afterwards, being
 apprized of his illness, they attacked the army and slew many. On that occasion, therefore, Hercules beat a
 retreat; but afterwards at the celebration of the third Isthmian festival, when the Eleans sent the Molionides
 to take part in the sacrifices, Hercules waylaid and killed them at Cleonae, 190 and marching on Elis took the city. And having killed Augeas and his
 sons, he restored Phyleus and bestowed on him the kingdom. 191 He also
 celebrated the Olympian games 192 and founded an altar of Pelops, 193 and built six altars of the twelve gods. 194 

 [2.7.3] After the capture of Elis he marched against Pylus, 195 and
 having taken the city he slew Periclymenus, the most valiant of the sons of Neleus, who used to change his shape
 in battle. 196 And he slew Neleus and his sons, except Nestor; for he was
 a youth and was being brought up among the Gerenians. In the fight he also wounded Hades, who was siding with
 the Pylians. 197 

 Having taken Pylus he marched against Lacedaemon, wishing to punish the sons of Hippocoon, 198 for he was angry with them, both because they fought for Neleus, and
 still angrier because they had killed the son of Licymnius. For when he was looking at the palace of Hippocoon,
 a hound of the Molossian breed ran out and rushed at him, and he threw a stone and hit the dog, whereupon the
 Hippocoontids darted out and despatched him with blows of their cudgels. It was to avenge his death that
 Hercules mustered an army against the Lacedaemonians. And having come to Arcadia he begged Cepheus to join him
 with his sons, of whom he had twenty. But fearing lest, if he quitted Tegea, the Argives would march against it,
 Cepheus refused to join the expedition. But Hercules had received from Athena a lock of the Gorgon's hair in a
 bronze jar and gave it to Sterope, daughter of Cepheus, saying that if an army advanced against the city, she
 was to hold up the lock of hair thrice from the walls, and that, provided she did not look before her, the enemy
 would be turned to flight. 199 That being so, Cepheus and his sons took
 the field, and in the battle he and his sons perished, and besides them Iphicles, the brother of Hercules.
 Having killed Hippocoon and his sons and subjugated the city, Hercules restored Tyndareus and entrusted the
 kingdom to him.

 [2.7.4] Passing by Tegea, Hercules debauched Auge, not knowing her to be a daughter of Aleus. 200 And she brought forth her babe secretly and deposited it in the precinct
 of Athena. But the country being wasted by a pestilence, Aleus entered the precinct and on investigation
 discovered his daughter's motherhood. So he exposed the babe on Mount Parthenius, and by the providence of the
 gods it was preserved: for a doe that had just cast her fawn gave it suck, and shepherds took up the babe and
 called it Telephus. 201 And her father gave Auge to Nauplius, son of
 Poseidon, to sell far away in a foreign land; and Nauplius gave her to Teuthras, the prince of Teuthrania, who
 made her his wife.

 [2.7.5] And having come to Calydon, Hercules wooed Deianira, daughter of Oeneus. 202 He wrestled for her hand with Achelous, who assumed the likeness of a
 bull; but Hercules broke off one of his horns. 203 So Hercules married
 Deianira, but Achelous recovered the horn by giving the horn of Amalthea in its stead. Now Amalthea was a
 daughter of Haemonius, and she had a bull's horn, which, according to Pherecydes, had the power of supplying
 meat or drink in abundance, whatever one might wish. 204 

 [2.7.6] And Hercules marched with the Calydonians against the Thesprotians, and having taken the city of
 Ephyra, of which Phylas was king, he had intercourse with the king's daughter Astyoche, and became the father of
 Tlepolemus. 205 While he stayed among them, he sent word to Thespius to
 keep seven of his sons, to send three to Thebes and to despatch the remaining forty to the island of Sardinia to
 plant a colony. 206 After these events, as he was feasting with Oeneus, he
 killed with a blow of his knuckles endeavored, son of Architeles, when the lad was pouring water on his hands;
 now the lad was a kinsman of Oeneus. 207 Seeing that it was an accident,
 the lad's father pardoned Hercules; but Hercules wished, in accordance with the law, to suffer the penalty of
 exile, and resolved to depart to Ceyx at Trachis. And taking Deianira with him, he came to the river Evenus, at
 which the centaur Nessus sat and ferried passengers across for hire, 208 
 alleging that he had received the ferry from the gods for his righteousness. So Hercules crossed the river by
 himself, but on being asked to pay the fare he entrusted Deianira to Nessus to carry over. But he, in ferrying
 her across, attempted to violate her. She cried out, Hercules heard her, and shot Nessus to the heart when he
 emerged from the river. Being at the point of death, Nessus called Deianira to him and said that if she would
 have a love charm to operate on Hercules she should mix the seed he had dropped on the ground with the blood
 that flowed from the wound inflicted by the barb. She did so and kept it by her.

 [2.7.7] Going through the country of the Dryopes and being in lack of food, Hercules met Thiodamas driving a
 pair of bullocks; so he unloosed and slaughtered one of the bullocks and feasted. 209 And when he came to Ceyx at Trachis he was received by him and conquered
 the Dryopes. 210 

 And afterwards setting out from there, he fought as an ally of Aegimius, king of the Dorians. 211 For the Lapiths, commanded by Coronus, made war on him in a dispute about
 the boundaries of the country; and being besieged he called in the help of Hercules, offering him a share of the
 country. So Hercules came to his help and slew Coronus and others, and handed the whole country over to Aegimius
 free. He slew also Laogoras, 212 king of the Dryopes, with his children,
 as he was banqueting in a precinct of Apollo; for the king was a wanton fellow and an ally of the Lapiths. And
 as he passed by Itonus he was challenged to single combat by Cycnus a son of Ares and Pelopia; and closing with
 him Hercules slew him also. 213 But when he was come to Ormenium, king
 Amyntor took arms and forbade him to march through; but when he would have hindered his passage, Hercules slew
 him also. 214 

 On his arrival at Trachis he mustered an army to attack Oechalia, wishing to punish Eurytus. 215 Being joined by Arcadians, Melians from Trachis, and Epicnemidian
 Locrians, he slew Eurytus and his sons and took the city. After burying those of his own side who had fallen, to
 wit, Hippasus, son of Ceyx, and Argius and Melas, the sons of Licymnius, he pillaged the city and led Iole
 captive. And having put in at Cenaeum, a headland of Euboea, he built an altar of Cenaean Zeus. 216 Intending to offer sacrifice, he sent the herald Lichas to Trachis to
 fetch fine raiment. 217 From him Deianira learned about Iole, and fearing
 that Hercules might love that damsel more than herself, she supposed that the spilt blood of Nessus was in truth
 a love-charm, and with it she smeared the tunic. 218 So Hercules put it on
 and proceeded to offer sacrifice. But no sooner was the tunic warmed than the poison of the hydra began to
 corrode his skin; and on that he lifted Lichas by the feet, hurled him down from the headland, 219 and tore off the tunic, which clung to his body, so that his flesh was
 torn away with it. In such a sad plight he was carried on shipboard to Trachis: and Deianira, on learning what
 had happened, hanged herself. 220 But Hercules, after charging Hyllus his
 elder son by Deianira, to marry Iole when he came of age, 221 proceeded to
 Mount Oeta, in the Trachinian territory, and there constructed a pyre, 222 
 mounted it, and gave orders to kindle it. When no one would do so, Poeas, passing by to look for his flocks, set
 a light to it. On him Hercules bestowed his bow. While the pyre was burning, it is said that a cloud passed
 under Hercules and with a peal of thunder wafted him up to heaven. 223 
 Thereafter he obtained immortality, and being reconciled to Hera he married her daughter Hebe, 224 by whom he had sons, Alexiares and Anicetus.

 [2.7.8] And he had sons by the daughters of Thespius, 225 to wit: by
 Procris he had Antileon and Hippeus( for the eldest daughter bore twins); by Panope he had Threpsippas; by Lyse
 he had Eumedes; ... he had Creon; by Epilais he had Astyanax; by Certhe he had Iobes; by Eurybia he had
 Polylaus; by Patro he had Archemachus; by Meline he had Laomedon; by Clytippe he had Eurycapys; by Eubote he had
 Eurypylus; by Aglaia he had Antiades; by Chryseis he had Onesippus; by Oriahe had Laomenes; by Lysidice he had
 Teles; by Menippis he had Entelides; by Anthippe he had Hippodromus; by Eury ... he had Teleutagoras; by Hippo
 he had Capylus; by Euboea he had Olympus; by Nice he had Nicodromus; by Argele he had Cleolaus; by Exole he had
 Erythras; by Xanthis he had Homolippus; by Stratonice he had Atromus; by Iphis he had Celeustanor; by Laothoe he
 had Antiphus; by Antiope he had Alopius; by Calametis he had Astybies; by Phyleis he had Tigasis, by Aeschreis
 he had Leucones; by Anthea ... ; by Eurypyle he had Archedicus; by Erato he had Dynastes; by Asopis he had
 Mentor; by Eone he had Amestrius; by Tiphyse he had Lyncaeus; by Olympusa he had Halocrates; by Heliconis he had
 Phalias; by Hesychia he had Oestrobles; by Terpsicrate he had Euryopes; by Elachia he had Buleus; by Nicippe he
 had Antimachus; by Pyrippehe had Patroclus; by Praxithea he had Nephus; by Lysippe he had Erasippus; by
 Toxicrate he had Lycurgus; by Marse he had Bucolus; by Eurytele he had Leucippus; by Hippocrate he had
 Hippozygus. These he had by the daughters of Thespius. And he had sons by other women: by Deianira, daughter of
 Oeneus, he had Hyllus, Ctesippus, Glenus and Onites 226 ; by Megara,
 daughter of Creon, he had Therimachus, Deicoon, and Creontiades 227 ; by
 Omphale he had Agelaus, 228 from whom the family of Croesus was
 descended, 229 by Chalciope, daughter of Eurypylus, he had Thettalus; by
 Epicaste, daughter of Augeas, he had Thestalus; by Parthenope, daughter of Stymphalus, he had Everes; by Auge,
 daughter of Aleus, he had Telephus 230 ; by Astyoche, daughter of Phylas,
 he had Tlepolemus 231 ; by Astydamia, daughter of Amyntor, he had
 Ctesippus; by Autonoe, daughter of Pireus, he had Palaemon.

 [2.8.1] When Hercules had been translated to the gods, his sons fled from Eurystheus and came
 to Ceyx. 232 But when Eurystheus demanded their surrender and threatened
 war, they were afraid, and, quitting Trachis, fled through Greece. Being pursued, they came to Athens, and
 sitting down on the altar of Mercy, claimed protection. 233 Refusing to
 surrender them, the Athenians bore the brunt of war with Eurystheus, and slew his sons, Alexander, Iphimedon,
 Eurybius, Mentor and Perimedes. Eurystheus himself fled in a chariot, but was pursued and slain by Hyllus just
 as he was driving past the Scironian cliffs; and Hyllus cut off his head and gave it to Alcmena; and she gouged
 out his eyes with weaving-pins. 234 

 [2.8.2] After Eurystheus had perished, the Heraclids came to attack Peloponnese and they captured all the
 cities. 235 When a year had elapsed from their return, a plague visited
 the whole of Peloponnese; and an oracle declared that this happened on account of the Heraclids, because they
 had returned before the proper time. Hence they quitted Peloponnese and retired to Marathon and dwelt
 there. 236 Now before they came out of Peloponnese, Tlepolemus had killed
 Licymnius inadvertently; for while he was beating a servant with his stick Licymnius ran in between; so he fled
 with not a few, and came to Rhodes, and dwelt there. 237 But Hyllus
 married Iole according to his father's commands, and sought to effect the return of the Heraclids. So he went to
 Delphi and inquired how they should return; and the god said that they should await the third crop before
 returning. But Hyllus supposed that the third crop signified three years; and having waited that time he
 returned with his army 238 . . . of Hercules to Peloponnese, when
 Tisamenus, son of Orestes, was reigning over the Peloponnesians. 239 And
 in another battle the Peloponnesians were victorious, and Aristomachus 240 
 was slain. But when the sons of Cleodaeus 241 were grown to man's estate,
 they inquired of the oracle concerning their return. And the god having given the same answer as before, Temenus
 blamed him, saying that when they had obeyed the oracle they had been unfortunate. But the god retorted that
 they were themselves to blame for their misfortunes, for they did not understand the oracles, seeing that by
 “the third crop” he meant, not a crop of the earth, but a crop of a generation, and that by the
 narrows he meant the broad-bellied sea on the right of the Isthmus. 242 On
 hearing that, Temenus made ready the army and built ships in Locris where the place is now named Naupactus from
 that. 243 While the army was there, Aristodemus was killed by a
 thunderbolt, 244 leaving twin sons, Eurysthenes and Procles, by Argia,
 daughter of Autesion. 245 

 [2.8.3] And it chanced that a calamity also befell the army at Naupactus. For there appeared to them a
 soothsayer reciting oracles in a fine frenzy, whom they took for a magician sent by the Peloponnesians to be the
 ruin of the army. So Hippotes, son of Phylas, son of Antiochus, son of Hercules, threw a javelin at him, and hit
 and killed him. 246 In consequence of that, the naval force perished with
 the destruction of the fleet, and the land force suffered from famine, and the army disbanded. When Temenus
 inquired of the oracle concerning this calamity, the god said that these things were done by the
 soothsayer 247 and he ordered him to banish the slayer for ten years and
 to take for his guide the Three-Eyed One. So they banished Hippotes, and sought for the Three-Eyed One. 248 And they chanced to light on Oxylus, son of Andraemon, a man sitting on a
 one-eyed horse (its other eye having been knocked out with an arrow); for he had fled to Elis on account of a
 murder, and was now returning from there to Aetolia after the lapse of a year. 249 So guessing the purport of the oracle, they made him their guide. And
 having engaged the enemy they got the better of him both by land and sea, and slew Tisamenus, son of
 Orestes. 250 Their allies, Pamphylus and Dymas, the sons of Aegimius, also
 fell in the fight.

 [2.8.4] When they had made themselves masters of Peloponnese, they set up three altars of Paternal Zeus, and
 sacrificed upon them, and cast lots for the cities. So the first drawing was for Argos, the second for
 Lacedaemon, and the third for Messene. And they brought a pitcher of water, and resolved that each should cast
 in a lot. Now Temenus and the two sons of Aristodemus, Procles and Eurysthenes, threw stones; but Cresphontes,
 wishing to have Messene allotted to him, threw in a clod of earth. As the clod was dissolved in the water, it
 could not be but that the other two lots should turn up. The lot of Temenus having been drawn first, and that of
 the sons of Aristodemus second, Cresphontes got Messene. 251 

 [2.8.5] And on the altars on which they sacrificed they found signs lying: for they who got Argos by the lot
 found a toad; those who got Lacedaemon found a serpent; and those who got Messene found a fox. 252 As to these signs the seers said that those who found the toad had better
 stay in the city (seeing that the animal has no strength when it walks); that those who found the serpent would
 be terrible in attack, and that those who found the fox would be wily.

 Now Temenus, passing over his sons Agelaus, Eurypylus, and Callias, favoured his daughter Hyrnetho and her
 husband Deiphontes; hence his sons hired some fellows to murder their father. 253 On the perpetration of the murder the army decided that the kingdom
 belonged to Hyrnetho 254 and Deiphontes. Cresphontes had not long reigned
 over Messene when he was murdered with two of his sons 255 ; and
 Polyphontes, one of the true Heraclids, came to the throne and took to wife, against her will, Merope, the wife
 of the murdered man. 256 But he too was slain. For Merope had a third son,
 called Aepytus, whom she gave to her own father to bring up. When he was come to manhood he secretly returned,
 killed Polyphontes, and recovered the kingdom of his fathers. 257 

 SEARCH THEOI

 CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

 Aeschylus, Agamemnon 

 Aeschylus, Eumenides 

 Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 

 Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 

 Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 

 Aeschylus, Suppliant Women 

 Aeschylus, Fragments 

 Alcman, Fragments 

 Apollodorus, The Library 

 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 

 Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena 

 Bion, Poems 

 Callimachus, Hymns 

 Callistratus, Descriptions 

 Claudian, Gigantomachia 

 Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 

 Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks 

 Clement, Recognitions 

 Colluthus, Rape of Helen 

 Dares Phrygius 

 Dictys Cretensis 

 Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 

 Epic Cycle Fragments 

 Fulgentius, Mythologies 

 Greek Lyric Fragments 

 Hesiod, Shield of Heracles 

 Hesiod, Theogony 

 Hesiod, Works and Days 

 Hesiod, Fragments 

 Homer, Iliad 

 Homer, Odyssey 

 Homeric Hymns 

 Hyginus, Astronomica 

 Hyginus, Fabulae 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 

 Lycophron, Alexandra 

 Moschus, Poems 

 Nonnus, Dionysiaca 

 Orphic Hymns 

 Ovid, Fasti 

 Ovid, Heroides 

 Ovid, Metamorphoses 

 Parthenius, Love Romances 

 Pattern Poems 

 Pausanias, Description of Greece 

 Philostratus the Elder, Imagines 

 Philostratus the Younger, Imagines 

 Plutarch, Life of Theseus 

 Plutarch, Parallel Stories 

 Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy 

 Seneca, Agamemnon 

 Seneca, Hercules Furens 

 Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus 

 Seneca, Medea 

 Seneca, Oedipus 

 Seneca, Phaedra 

 Seneca, Phoenissae 

 Seneca, Thyestes 

 Seneca, Troades 

 Statius, Achilleid 

 Statius, Thebaid 

 Theocritus, Idylls 

 Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios 

 Tzetzes, Chiliades 

 Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica 

 Virgil, Aeneid 

 Virgil, Eclogues 

 Virgil, Georgics 

 RECENT ARTICLES 

 Who Was Achilles A Warrior? 

 What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules? 

 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z 

--> 

 .

 Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

 Contact Us