.

 Toggle navigation 
 Theoi Project - Classical Texts
 Library 

 LIBRARY HOME 
 GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
 GREEK GODS 
 
 Olympian Gods 
 Primordial Gods 
 Titan Gods 
 Sky Gods 
 Sea Gods 
 Rustic Gods 
 Underworld Gods 
 Daemones-Spirits 
 Nymphs 
 more >> 

 BESTIARY 
 HEROES 
 MISCELLANY 
 
 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z 
 Family Tree of the Gods 
 Legendary Tribes 
 Legendary Creatures 
 Star Myths 
 Plant & Flower Myths 

 GALLERY 

 Classical Texts
 Library >> Apollodorus, The Library >> Book
 1 
 APOLLODORUS, THE LIBRARY 1 

 APOLLODORUS or Pseudo-Apollodorus is the name traditionally given to the author of the Greek work known as
 The Library or Bibliotheca , a compendium of myth sourced from old Greek epic and the plays of
 the Tragedians. The work was traditionally ascribed to Apollodorus of Alexandria, a Greek scholar who flourished
 in the C2nd B.C., but his authorship is now dismissed. The work is generally believed to be a C2nd A.D.
 compilation.

 Apollodorus. The Library. Translated by Sir James George Frazer. Loeb Classical Library Volumes 121 & 122.
 Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921.

 The two Loeb volumes of Apollodorus are still in print and available new at Amazon.com (click on image right
 for details). In addition to the translation the book contains the source Greek text and Frazer's copious
 introduction and footnotes.

 For some more recent translations of Apollodorus' Library and academic commentaries on the work see
 the booklist (left below).

 NOTE: I have quoted from the Aldrich translation rather than the Loeb volume on the biography pages of the
 Theoi Greek Mythology site.

 THE LIBRARY CONTENTS

 BOOK 1 

 1 . Theogony: Birth of Zeus

 2 . Theogony: War of the Titans

 3 . Theogony: Olympian Gods

 4 . Apollo & Artemis

 5 . Demeter & Persephone

 6 . War of the Giants, Typhon

 7 . Prometheus, Deucalion, Daughters of Aeolus

 8 . Oeneus, Meleager, Tydeus

 9 . Sons of Aeolus, Melampus, Admetus, Pelias, Argonauts

 BOOK 2 

 1 . Io, Danaides

 2 . Proetus, Proetides

 3 . Bellerophon

 4 . Perseus, Sons of Perseus, Amphitryon, Birth of Heracles

 5 . Twelve Labours of Heracles

 6 . Wars of Heracles

 7 . Heracleidae

 BOOK 3 

 1 . Europa, Minos, Pasiphae

 2 . Catreus

 3 . Glaucus

 4 . Cadmus, Semele, Actaeon

 5 . Dionysus, Antiope, Amphion & Zethus, Oedipus

 6 . Seven Against Thebes

 7 . Epigoni

 8 . Lycaon, Callisto

 9 . Auge, Atalanta

 10 . Pleiades, Hermes, Coronis, Asclepius, Leda, Suitors of Helen

 11 . Dioscuri

 12 . Dardanus, Ilus, Priam, Aeacus, Telamon

 13 . Peleus & Thetis

 14 . Cecrops, Adonis, Tereus & Procne, Erichthonius

 15 . Cephalus, Oreithyia, Eumolpus, Aegeus

 16 . Theseus

 EPITOME 

 1 . Theseus cont.

 2 . Tantalus, Pelops, Atreus

 3 . Trojan War: Antehomerica

 4 . Trojan War: Iliad

 5 . Trojan War: Posthomerica

 6 . Trojan War: Returns

 7 . Odyssey & Telegonia

 THE LIBRARY BOOK 1, TRANSLATED BY J. G. FRAZER

 [1.1.1] Sky was the first who ruled over the whole world. 1 
 And having wedded Earth, he begat first the Hundred-handed, as they are named: Briareus, Gyes, Cottus, who were
 unsurpassed in size and might, each of them having a hundred hands and fifty heads. 2 

 [1.1.2] After these, Earth bore him the Cyclopes, to wit, Arges, Steropes, Brontes 3 of whom each had one eye on his forehead. But them Sky bound and cast into
 Tartarus, a gloomy place in Hades as far distant from earth as earth is distant from the sky. 4 

 [1.1.3] And again he begat children by Earth, to wit, the Titans as they are named: Ocean, Coeus, Hyperion,
 Crius, Iapetus, and, youngest of all, Cronus; also daughters, the Titanides as they are called: Tethys, Rhea,
 Themis, Mnemosyne, Phoebe, Dione, Thia. 5 

 [1.1.4] But Earth, grieved at the destruction of her children, who had been cast into Tartarus, persuaded the
 Titans to attack their father and gave Cronus an adamantine sickle. And they, all but Ocean, attacked him, and
 Cronus cut off his father's genitals and threw them into the sea; and from the drops of the flowing blood were
 born Furies, to wit, Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megaera. 6 And, having dethroned
 their father, they brought up their brethren who had been hurled down to Tartarus, and committed the sovereignty
 to Cronus.

 [1.1.5] But he again bound and shut them up in Tartarus, and wedded his sister Rhea; and since both Earth and
 Sky foretold him that he would be dethroned by his own son, he used to swallow his offspring at birth. His
 firstborn Hestia he swallowed, then Demeter and Hera, and after them Pluto and Poseidon. 7 

 [1.1.6] Enraged at this, Rhea repaired to Crete, when she was big with Zeus, and brought him forth in a cave of
 Dicte. 8 She gave him to the Curetes and to the nymphs Adrastia and Ida,
 daughters of Melisseus, to nurse. 

 [1.1.7] So these nymphs fed the child on the milk of Amalthea 9 ; and the
 Curetes in arms guarded the babe in the cave, clashing their spears on their shields in order that Cronus might
 not hear the child's voice. 10 But Rhea wrapped a stone in swaddling
 clothes and gave it to Cronus to swallow, as if it were the newborn child. 11 

 [1.2.1] But when Zeus was full-grown, he took Metis, daughter of Ocean, to help him, and she
 gave Cronus a drug to swallow, 12 which forced him to disgorge first the
 stone and then the children whom he had swallowed, and with their aid Zeus waged the war against Cronus and the
 Titans. 13 They fought for ten years, and Earth prophesied victory 14 to Zeus if he should have as allies those who had been hurled down to
 Tartarus. So he slew their jailoress Campe, and loosed their bonds. And the Cyclopes then gave Zeus thunder and
 lightning and a thunderbolt, 15 and on Pluto they bestowed a helmet and on
 Poseidon a trident. Armed with these weapons the gods overcame the Titans, shut them up in Tartarus, and
 appointed the Hundred-handers their guards 16 ; but they themselves cast
 lots for the sovereignty, and to Zeus was allotted the dominion of the sky, to Poseidon the dominion of the sea,
 and to Pluto the dominion in Hades. 17 

 [1.2.2] Now to the Titans were born offspring: to Ocean and Tethys were born Oceanids, to wit, Asia, Styx,
 Electra, Doris, Eurynome, Amphitrite, and Metis 18 ; to Coeus and Phoebe
 were born Asteria and Latona 19 ; to Hyperion and Thia were born Dawn, Sun,
 and Moon 20 ; to Crius and Eurybia, daughter of Sea (Pontus), were born
 Astraeus, Pallas, and Perses 21 ;

 [1.2.3] to Iapetus and Asia was born Atlas, who has the sky on his shoulders, and Prometheus, and Epimetheus,
 and Menoetius, he whom Zeus in the battle with the Titans smote with a thunderbolt and hurled down to
 Tartarus. 22 

 [1.2.4] And to Cronus and Philyra was born Chiron, a centaur of double form 23 ; and to Dawn and Astraeus were born winds and stars 24 ; to Perses and Asteria was born Hecate 25 ; and to Pallas and Styx were born Victory, Dominion, Emulation, and
 Violence. 26 

 [1.2.5] But Zeus caused oaths to be sworn by the water of Styx, which flows from a rock in Hades, bestowing
 this honor on her because she and her children had fought on his side against the Titans. 27 

 [1.2.6] And to Sea (Pontus) and Earth were born Phorcus, Thaumas, Nereus, Eurybia, and Ceto. 28 Now to Thaumas and Electra were born Iris and the Harpies, Aello and
 Ocypete 29 ; and to Phorcus and Ceto were born the Phorcides and
 Gorgons, 30 of whom we shall speak when we treat of Perseus.

 [1.2.7] To Nereus and Doris were born the Nereids, 31 whose names are
 Cymothoe, Spio, Glauconome, Nausithoe, Halie, Erato, Sao, Amphitrite, Eunice, Thetis, Eulimene, Agave, Eudore,
 Doto, Pherusa, Galatea, Actaea, Pontomedusa, Hippothoe, Lysianassa, Cymo, Eione, Halimede, Plexaure, Eucrante,
 Proto, Calypso, Panope, Cranto, Neomeris, Hipponoe, Ianira, Polynome, Autonoe, Melite, Dione, Nesaea, Dero,
 Evagore, Psamathe, Eumolpe, Ione, Dynamene, Ceto, and Limnoria. 

 [1.3.1] Now Zeus wedded Hera and begat Hebe, Ilithyia, and Ares, 32 but he had intercourse with many women, both mortals and immortals. By
 Themis, daughter of Sky, he had daughters, the Seasons, to wit, Peace, Order, and Justice; also the Fates, to
 wit, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropus 33 ; by Dione he had Aphrodite 34 ; by Eurynome, daughter of Ocean, he had the Graces, to wit, Aglaia,
 Euphrosyne, and Thalia 35 ; by Styx he had Persephone 36 ; and by Memory (Mnemosyne) he had the Muses, first Calliope, then Clio,
 Melpomene, Euterpe, Erato, Terpsichore, Urania, Thalia, and Polymnia. 37 

 [1.3.2] Now Calliope bore to Oeagrus or, nominally, to Apollo, a son Linus, 38 whom Hercules slew; and another son, Orpheus, 39 who practised minstrelsy and by his songs moved stones and trees. And when
 his wife Eurydice died, bitten by a snake, he went down to Hades, being fain to bring her up, 40 and he persuaded Pluto to send her up. The god promised to do so, if on the
 way Orpheus would not turn round until he should be come to his own house. But he disobeyed and turning round
 beheld his wife; so she turned back. Orpheus also invented the mysteries of Dionysus, 41 and having been torn in pieces by the Maenads 42 he is buried in Pieria.

 [1.3.3] Clio fell in love with Pierus, son of Magnes, in consequence of the wrath of Aphrodite, whom she had
 twitted with her love of Adonis; and having met him she bore him a son Hyacinth, for whom Thamyris, the son of
 Philammon and a nymph Argiope, conceived a passion, he being the first to become enamored of males. But
 afterwards Apollo loved Hyacinth and killed him involuntarily by the cast of a quoit. 43 And Thamyris, who excelled in beauty and in minstrelsy, engaged in a
 musical contest with the Muses, the agreement being that, if he won, he should enjoy them all, but that if he
 should be vanquished he should be bereft of what they would. So the Muses got the better of him and bereft him
 both of his eyes and of his minstrelsy. 44 

 [1.3.4] Euterpe had by the river Strymon a son Rhesus, whom Diomedes slew at Troy 45 ; but some say his mother was Calliope. Thalia had by Apollo the
 Corybantes 46 ; and Melpomene had by Achelous the Sirens, of whom we shall
 speak in treating of Ulysses. 47 

 [1.3.5] Hera gave birth to Hephaestus without intercourse with the other sex, 48 but according to Homer he was one of her children by Zeus. 49 Him Zeus cast out of heaven, because he came to the rescue of Hera in her
 bonds. 50 For when Hercules had taken Troy and was at sea, Hera sent a
 storm after him; so Zeus hung her from Olympus. 51 Hephaestus fell on
 Lemnos and was lamed of his legs, 52 but Thetis saved him. 53 

 [1.3.6] Zeus had intercourse with Metis, who turned into many shapes in order to avoid his embraces. When she
 was with child, Zeus, taking time by the forelock, swallowed her, because Earth said that, after giving birth to
 the maiden who was then in her womb, Metis would bear a son who should be the lord of heaven. From fear of that
 Zeus swallowed her. 54 And when the time came for the birth to take place,
 Prometheus or, as others say, Hephaestus, smote the head of Zeus with an axe, and Athena, fully armed, leaped up
 from the top of his head at the river Triton. 55 

 [1.4.1]Of the daughters of Coeus, Asteria in the likeness of a quail flung herself into the sea
 in order to escape the amorous advances of Zeus, and a city was formerly called after her Asteria, but
 afterwards it was named Delos. 56 But Latona for her intrigue with Zeus was
 hunted by Hera over the whole earth, till she came to Delos and brought forth first Artemis, by the help of
 whose midwifery she afterwards gave birth to Apollo. 57 

 Now Artemis devoted herself to the chase and remained a maid; but Apollo learned the art of prophecy from Pan,
 the son of Zeus and Hybris, 58 and came to Delphi, where Themis at that
 time used to deliver oracles 59 ; and when the snake Python, which guarded
 the oracle, would have hindered him from approaching the chasm, 60 he
 killed it and took over the oracle. 61 Not long afterwards he slew also
 Tityus, who was a son of Zeus and Elare, daughter of Orchomenus; for her, after he had debauched her, Zeus hid
 under the earth for fear of Hera, and brought forth to the light the son Tityus, of monstrous size, whom she had
 borne in her womb. 62 When Latona came to Pytho, Tityus beheld her, and
 overpowered by lust drew her to him. But she called her children to her aid, and they shot him down with their
 arrows. And he is punished even after death; for vultures eat his heart in Hades. 63 

 [1.4.2] Apollo also slew Marsyas, the son of Olympus. For Marsyas, having found the pipes which Athena had
 thrown away because they disfigured her face, 64 engaged in a musical
 contest with Apollo. They agreed that the victor should work his will on the vanquished, and when the trial took
 place Apollo turned his lyre upside down in the competition and bade Marsyas do the same. But Marsyas could not,
 so Apollo was judged the victor and despatched Marsyas by hanging him on a tall pine tree and stripping off his
 skin. 65 

 [1.4.3] And Artemis slew Orion in Delos. 66 They say that he was of
 gigantic stature and born of the earth; but Pherecydes says that he was a son of Poseidon and Euryale. 67 Poseidon bestowed on him the power of striding across the sea. 68 He first married Side, 69 whom Hera
 cast into Hades because she rivalled herself in beauty. Afterwards he went to Chios and wooed Merope, daughter
 of Oenopion. But Oenopion made him drunk, put out his eyes as he slept, and cast him on the beach. But he went
 to the smithy of Hephaestus, and snatching up a lad set him on his shoulders and bade him lead him to the
 sunrise. Being come thither he was healed by the sun's rays, and having recovered his sight he hastened with all
 speed against Oenopion.

 [1.4.4] But for him Poseidon had made ready a house under the earth constructed by Hephaestus. 70 And Dawn fell in love with Orion and carried him off and brought him to
 Delos; for Aphrodite caused Dawn to be perpetually in love, because she had bedded with Ares. 

 [1.4.5] But Orion was killed, as some say, for challenging Artemis to a match at quoits, but some say he was
 shot by Artemis for offering violence to Opis, one of the maidens who had come from the Hyperboreans. 71 

 Poseidon wedded Amphitrite, daughter of Ocean, and there were born to him Triton 72 and Rhode, who was married to the Sun. 73 

 [1.5.1] Pluto fell in love with Persephone and with the help of Zeus carried her off
 secretly. 74 But Demeter went about seeking her all over the earth with
 torches by night and day, and learning from the people of Hermion that Pluto had carried her off, 75 she was wroth with the gods and quitted heaven, and came in the likeness of
 a woman to Eleusis. And first she sat down on the rock which has been named Laughless after her, beside what is
 called the Well of the Fair Dances 76 ; thereupon she made her way to
 Celeus, who at that time reigned over the Eleusinians. Some women were in the house, and when they bade her sit
 down beside them, a certain old crone, Iambe, joked the goddess and made her smile. 77 For that reason they say that the women break jests at the
 Thesmophoria. 78 

 But Metanira, wife of Celeus, had a child and Demeter received it to nurse, and wishing to make it immortal she
 set the babe of nights on the fire and stripped off its mortal flesh. But as Demophon -- for that was the
 child's name -- grew marvelously by day, Praxithea watched, and discovering him buried in the fire she cried
 out; wherefore the babe was consumed by the fire and the goddess revealed herself. 79 

 [1.5.2] But for Triptolemus, the elder of Metanira's children, she made a chariot of winged dragons, and gave
 him wheat, with which, wafted through the sky, he sowed the whole inhabited earth. 80 But Panyasis affirms that Triptolemus was a son of Eleusis, for he says
 that Demeter came to him. Pherecydes, however, says that he was a son of Ocean and Earth. 81 

 [1.5.3] But when Zeus ordered Pluto to send up the Maid, Pluto gave her a seed of a pomegranate to eat, in
 order that she might not tarry long with her mother. 82 Not foreseeing the
 consequence, she swallowed it; and because Ascalaphus, son of Acheron and Gorgyra, bore witness against her,
 Demeter laid a heavy rock on him in Hades. 83 But Persephone was compelled
 to remain a third of every year with Pluto and the rest of the time with the gods. 84 

 [1.6.1] Such is the legend of Demeter. But Earth, vexed on account of the Titans, brought forth
 the giants, whom she had by Sky. 85 These were matchless in the bulk of
 their bodies and invincible in their might; terrible of aspect did they appear, with long locks drooping from
 their head and chin, and with the scales of dragons for feet. 86 They were
 born, as some say, in Phlegrae, but according to others in Pallene. 87 And
 they darted rocks and burning oaks at the sky. Surpassing all the rest were Porphyrion and Alcyoneus, who was
 even immortal so long as he fought in the land of his birth. He also drove away the cows of the Sun from
 Erythia. Now the gods had an oracle that none of the giants could perish at the hand of gods, but that with the
 help of a mortal they would be made an end of. Learning of this, Earth sought for a simple to prevent the giants
 from being destroyed even by a mortal. But Zeus forbade the Dawn and the Moon and the Sun to shine, and then,
 before anybody else could get it, he culled the simple himself, and by means of Athena summoned Hercules to his
 help. Hercules first shot Alcyoneus with an arrow, but when the giant fell on the ground he somewhat revived.
 However, at Athena's advice Hercules dragged him outside Pallene, and so the giant died. 88 

 [1.6.2] But in the battle Porphyrion attacked Hercules and Hera. Nevertheless Zeus inspired him with lust for
 Hera, and when he tore her robes and would have forced her, she called for help, and Zeus smote him with a
 thunderbolt, and Hercules shot him dead with an arrow. 89 As for the other
 giants, Ephialtes was shot by Apollo with an arrow in his left eye and by Hercules in his right; Eurytus was
 killed by Dionysus with a thyrsus, and Clytius by Hecate with torches, and Mimas by Hephaestus with missiles of
 red-hot metal. 90 Enceladus fled, but Athena threw on him in his flight the
 island of Sicily 91 ; and she flayed Pallas and used his skin to shield her
 own body in the fight. 92 Polybotes was chased through the sea by Poseidon
 and came to Cos; and Poseidon, breaking off that piece of the island which is called Nisyrum, threw it on
 him. 93 And Hermes, wearing the helmet of Hades, 94 slew Hippolytus in the fight, and Artemis slew Gration. And the Fates,
 fighting with brazer clubs, killed Agrius and Thoas. The other giants Zeus smote and destroyed with thunderbolts
 and all of them Hercules shot with arrows as they were dying.

 [1.6.3] When the gods had overcome the giants, Earth, still more enraged, had intercourse with Tartarus and
 brought forth Typhon in Cilicia, 95 a hybrid between man and beast. In size
 and strength he surpassed all the offspring of Earth. As far as the thighs he was of human shape and of such
 prodigious bulk that he out-topped all the mountains, and his head often brushed the stars. One of his hands
 reached out to the west and the other to the east, and from them projected a hundred dragons' heads. From the
 thighs downward he had huge coils of vipers, which when drawn out, reached to his very head and emitted a loud
 hissing. His body was all winged 96 : unkempt hair streamed on the wind from
 his head and cheeks; and fire flashed from his eyes. Such and so great was Typhon when, hurling kindled rocks,
 he made for the very heaven with hissings and shouts, spouting a great jet of fire from his mouth. But when the
 gods saw him rushing at heaven, they made for Egypt in flight, and being pursued they changed their forms into
 those of animals. 97 However Zeus pelted Typhon at a distance with
 thunderbolts, and at close quarters struck him down with an adamantine sickle, and as he fled pursued him
 closely as far as Mount Casius, which overhangs Syria. There, seeing the monster sore wounded, he grappled with
 him. But Typhon twined about him and gripped him in his coils, and wresting the sickle from him severed the
 sinews of his hands and feet, and lifting him on his shoulders carried him through the sea to Cilicia and
 deposited him on arrival in the Corycian cave. Likewise he put away the sinews there also, hidden in a bearskin,
 and he set to guard them the she-dragon Delphyne, who was a half-bestial maiden. But Hermes and Aegipan stole
 the sinews and fitted them unobserved to Zeus. 98 And having recovered his
 strength Zeus suddenly from heaven, riding in a chariot of winged horses, pelted Typhon with thunderbolts and
 pursued him to the mountain called Nysa, where the Fates beguiled the fugitive; for he tasted of the ephemeral
 fruits in the persuasion that he would be strengthened thereby. 99 So being
 again pursued he came to Thrace, and in fighting at Mount Haemus he heaved whole mountains. But when these
 recoiled on him through the force of the thunderbolt, a stream of blood gushed out on the mountain, and they say
 that from that circumstance the mountain was called Haemus. 100 And when
 he started to flee through the Sicilian sea, Zeus cast Mount Etna in Sicily upon him. That is a huge mountain,
 from which down to this day they say that blasts of fire issue from the thunderbolts that were thrown. 101 So much for that subject.

 [1.7.1] Prometheus moulded men out of water and earth 102 
 and gave them also fire, which, unknown to Zeus, he had hidden in a stalk of fennel. 103 But when Zeus learned of it, he ordered Hephaestus to nail his body to
 Mount Caucasus, which is a Scythian mountain. On it Prometheus was nailed and kept bound for many years. Every
 day an eagle swooped on him and devoured the lobes of his liver, which grew by night. That was the penalty that
 Prometheus paid for the theft of fire until Hercules afterwards released him, as we shall show in dealing with
 Hercules. 104 

 [1.7.2] And Prometheus had a son Deucalion. 105 He reigning in the
 regions about Phthia, married Pyrrha, the daughter of Epimetheus and Pandora, the first woman fashioned by the
 gods. 106 And when Zeus would destroy the men of the Bronze Age, Deucalion
 by the advice of Prometheus constructed a chest, 107 and having stored it
 with provisions he embarked in it with Pyrrha. But Zeus by pouring heavy rain from heaven flooded the greater
 part of Greece, so that all men were destroyed, except a few who fled to the high mountains in the neighborhood.
 It was then that the mountains in Thessaly parted, and that all the world outside the Isthmus and Peloponnese
 was overwhelmed. But Deucalion, floating in the chest over the sea for nine days and as many nights, drifted to
 Parnassus, and there, when the rain ceased, he landed and sacrificed to Zeus, the god of Escape. And Zeus sent
 Hermes to him and allowed him to choose what he would, and he chose to get men. And at the bidding of Zeus he
 took up stones and threw them over his head, and the stones which Deucalion threw became men, and the stones
 which Pyrrha threw became women. Hence people were called metaphorically people (laos) from laas, “a
 stone.” 108 And Deucalion had children by Pyrrha, first Hellen,
 whose father some say was Zeus, and second Amphictyon, who reigned over Attica after Cranaus; and third a
 daughter Protogenia, who became the mother of Aethlius by Zeus. 109 

 [1.7.3] Hellen had Dorus, Xuthus, and Aeolus 110 by a nymph Orseis. Those
 who were called Greeks he named Hellenes after himself, 111 and divided
 the country among his sons. Xuthus received Peloponnese and begat Achaeus and Ion by Creusa, daughter of
 Erechtheus, and from Achaeus and Ion the Achaeans and Ionians derive their names. Dorus received the country
 over against Peloponnese and called the settlers Dorians after himself. 112 Aeolus reigned over the regions about Thessaly and named the inhabitants
 Aeolians. 113 He married Enarete, daughter of Deimachus, and begat seven
 sons, Cretheus, Sisyphus, Athamas, Salmoneus, Deion, Magnes, Perieres, and five daughters, Canace, Alcyone,
 Pisidice, Calyce, Perimede. 114 

 Perimede had Hippodamas and Orestes by Achelous; and Pisidice had Antiphus and Actor by Myrmidon. 

 [1.7.4] Alcyone was married by Ceyx, son of Lucifer. 115 These perished
 by reason of their pride; for he said that his wife was Hera, and she said that her husband was Zeus. 116 But Zeus turned them into birds; her he made a kingfisher (alcyon) and
 him a gannet (ceyx). 117 

 Canace had by Poseidon Hopleus and Nireus and Epopeus and Aloeus and Triops. Aloeus wedded Iphimedia, daughter
 of Triops; but she fell in love with Poseidon, and often going to the sea she would draw up the waves with her
 hands and pour them into her lap. Poseidon met her and begat two sons, Otus and Ephialtes, who are called the
 Aloads. 118 These grew every year a cubit in breadth and a fathom in
 height; and when they were nine years old, 119 being nine cubits broad and
 nine fathoms high, they resolved to fight against the gods, and they set Ossa on Olympus, and having set Pelion
 on Ossa they threatened by means of these mountains to ascend up to heaven, and they said that by filling up the
 sea with the mountains they would make it dry land, and the land they would make sea. And Ephialtes wooed Hera,
 and Otus wooed Artemis; moreover they put Ares in bonds. 120 However,
 Hermes rescued Ares by stealth, and Artemis killed the Aloads in Naxos by a ruse. For she changed herself into a
 deer and leaped between them, and in their eagerness to hit the quarry they threw their darts at each
 other. 121 

 [1.7.5] Calyce and Aethlius had a son Endymion who led Aeolians from Thessaly and founded Elis. But some say
 that he was a son of Zeus. As he was of surpassing beauty, the Moon fell in love with him, and Zeus allowed him
 to choose what he would, and he chose to sleep for ever, remaining deathless and ageless. 122 

 [1.7.6] Endymion had by a Naiad nymph or, as some say, by Iphianassa, a son Aetolus, who slew Apis, son of
 Phoroneus, and fled to the Curetian country. There he killed his hosts, Dorus and Laodocus and Polypoetes, the
 sons of Phthia and Apollo, and called the country Aetolia after himself. 123 

 [1.7.7] Aetolus and Pronoe, daughter of Phorbus, had sons, Pleuron and Calydon, after whom the cities in
 Aetolia were named. Pleuron wedded Xanthippe, daughter of Dorus, and begat a son Agenor, and daughters, Sterope
 and Stratonice and Laophonte. Calydon and Aeolia, daughter of Amythaon, had daughters, Epicaste and Protogenia,
 who had Oxylus by Ares. And Agenor, son of Pleuron, married Epicaste, daughter of Calydon, and begat Porthaon
 and Demonice, who had Evenus, Molus, Pylus, and Thestius by Ares.

 [1.7.8] Evenus begat Marpessa, who was wooed by Apollo, but Idas, son of Aphareus, carried her off in a winged
 chariot which he received from Poseidon. 124 Pursuing him in a chariot,
 Evenus came to the river Lycormas, but when he could not catch him he slaughtered his horses and threw himself
 into the river, and the river is called Evenus after him. 

 [1.7.9] But Idas came to Messene, and Apollo, falling in with him, would have robbed him of the damsel. As they
 fought for the girl's hand, Zeus parted them and allowed the maiden herself to choose which of the two she would
 marry; and she, because she feared that Apollo might desert her in her old age, chose Idas for her
 husband. 125 

 [1.7.10] Thestius had daughters and sons by Eurythemis, daughter of Cleoboea: the daughters were Althaea,
 Leda, 126 Hypermnestra, and the males were Iphiclus, Evippus, Plexippus,
 and Eurypylus.

 Porthaon and Euryte, daughter of Hippodamas, had sons, Oeneus, Agrius, Alcathous, Melas, Leucopeus, and a
 daughter Sterope, who is said to have been the mother of the Sirens by Achelous. 

 [1.8.1] Reigning over Calydon, Oeneus was the first who received a vine-plant from
 Dionysus. 127 He married Althaea, daughter of Thestius, and begat Toxeus,
 whom he slew with his own hand because he leaped over the ditch. 128 And
 besides Toxeus he had Thyreus and Clymenus, and a daughter Gorge, whom Andraemon married, and another daughter
 Deianira, who is said to have been begotten on Althaea by Dionysus. This Deianira drove a chariot and practised
 the art of war, and Hercules wrestled for her hand with Achelous. 129 

 [1.8.2] Althaea had also a son Meleager, 130 by Oeneus, though they say
 that he was begotten by Ares. It is said that, when he was seven days old, the Fates came and declared that
 Meleager should die when the brand burning on the hearth was burnt out. On hearing that, Althaea snatched up the
 brand and deposited it in a chest. 131 Meleager grew up to be an
 invulnerable and gallant man, but came by his end in the following way. In sacrificing the first fruits of the
 annual crops of the country to all the gods Oeneus forgot Artemis alone. But she in her wrath sent a boar of
 extraordinary size and strength, which prevented the land from being sown and destroyed the cattle and the
 people that fell in with it. To attack this boar Oeneus called together all the noblest men of Greece, and
 promised that to him who should kill the beast he would give the skin as a prize. Now the men who assembled to
 hunt the boar were these 132 :-- Meleager, son of Oeneus; Dryas, son of
 Ares; these came from Calydon; Idas and Lynceus, sons of Aphareus, from Messene; Castor and Pollux, sons of Zeus
 and Leda, from Lacedaemon; Theseus, son of Aegeus, from Athens; Admetus, son of Pheres, from Pherae; Ancaeus and
 Cepheus, sons of Lycurgus, from Arcadia; Jason, son of Aeson, from Iolcus; Iphicles, son of Amphitryon, from
 Thebes; Pirithous, son of Ixion, from Larissa; Peleus, son of Aeacus, from Phthia; Telamon, son of Aeacus, from
 Salamis; Eurytion, son of Actor, from Phthia; Atalanta, daughter of Schoeneus, from Arcadia; Amphiaraus, son of
 Oicles, from Argos. With them came also the sons of Thestius. And when they were assembled, Oeneus entertained
 them for nine days; but on the tenth, when Cepheus and Ancaeus and some others disdained to go hunting with a
 woman, Meleager compelled them to follow the chase with her, for he desired to have a child also by Atalanta,
 though he had to wife Cleopatra, daughter of Idas and Marpessa. When they surrounded the boar, Hyleus and
 Ancaeus were killed by the brute, and Peleus struck down Eurytion undesignedly with a javelin. But Atalanta was
 the first to shoot the boar in the back with an arrow, and Amphiaraus was the next to shoot it in the eye; but
 Meleager killed it by a stab in the flank, and on receiving the skin gave it to Atalanta. Nevertheless the sons
 of Thestius, thinking scorn that a woman should get the prize in the face of men, took the skin from her,
 alleging that it belonged to them by right of birth if Meleager did not choose to take it.

 [1.8.3] But Meleager in a rage slew the sons of Thestius and gave the skin to Atalanta. However, from grief at
 the slaughter of her brothers Althaea kindled the brand, and Meleager immediately expired.

 But some say that Meleager did not die in that way, 133 but that when the
 sons of Thestius claimed the skin on the ground that Iphiclus had been the first to hit the boar, war broke out
 between the Curetes and the Calydonians; and when Meleager had sallied out 134 and slain some of the sons of Thestius, Althaea cursed him, and he in a
 rage remained at home; however, when the enemy approached the walls, and the citizens supplicated him to come to
 the rescue, he yielded reluctantly to his wife and sallied forth, and having killed the rest of the sons of
 Thestius, he himself fell fighting. After the death of Meleager, Althaea and Cleopatra hanged themselves, and
 the women who mourned the dead man were turned into birds. 135 

 [1.8.4] After Althaea's death Oeneus married Periboea, daughter of Hipponous. The author of the Thebaid says
 that when Olenus was sacked, Oeneus received Periboea as a gift of honor; but Hesiod says that she was seduced
 by Hippostratus, son of Amarynceus, and that her father Hipponous sent her away from Olenus in Achaia to Oeneus,
 because he dwelt far from Greece, with an injunction to put her to death. 136 

 [1.8.5] However, some say that Hipponous discovered that his daughter had been debauched by Oeneus, and
 therefore he sent her away to him when she was with child. By her Oeneus begat Tydeus. But Pisander says that
 the mother of Tydeus was Gorge, for Zeus willed it that Oeneus should fall in love with his own daughter. 137 

 When Tydeus had grown to be a gallant man he was banished for killing, as some say, Alcathous, brother of
 Oeneus; but according to the author of the Alcmaeonid his victims were the sons of Melas who had plotted against
 Oeneus, their names being Pheneus, Euryalus, Hyperlaus, Antiochus, Eumedes, Sternops, Xanthippus, Sthenelaus;
 but as Pherecydes will have it, he murdered his own brother Olenias. 138 
 Being arraigned by Agrius, he fled to Argos and came to Adrastus, whose daughter Deipyle he married and begat
 Diomedes.

 Tydeus marched against Thebes with Adrastus, 139 and died of a wound
 which he received at the hand of Melanippus.

 [1.8.6] But the sons of Agrius, to wit, Thersites, Onchestus, Prothous, Celeutor, Lycopeus, Melanippus, wrested
 the kingdom from Oeneus and gave it to their father, and more than that they imprisoned Oeneus in his lifetime
 and tormented him. 140 Nevertheless Diomedes afterwards came secretly with
 Alcmaeon from Argos and put to death all the sons of Agrius, except Onchestus and Thersites, who had fled
 betimes to Peloponnese; and as Oeneus was old, Diomedes gave the kingdom to Andraemon who had married the
 daughter of Oeneus, but Oeneus himself he took with him to Peloponnese. Howbeit, the sons of Agrius, who had
 made their escape, lay in wait for the old man at the hearth of Telephus in Arcadia, and killed him. But
 Diomedes conveyed the corpse to Argos and buried him in the place where now a city is called Oenoe after
 him. 141 And having married Aegialia, daughter of Adrastus or, as some
 say, of Aegialeus, he went to the wars against Thebes and Troy.

 [1.9.1]Of the sons of Aeolus, Athamas ruled over Boeotia and begat a son Phrixus and a daughter
 Helle by Nephele. 142 And he married a second wife, Ino, by whom he had
 Learchus and Melicertes. But Ino plotted against the children of Nephele and persuaded the women to parch the
 wheat; and having got the wheat they did so without the knowledge of the men. But the earth, being sown with
 parched wheat, did not yield its annual crops; so Athamas sent to Delphi to inquire how he might be delivered
 from the dearth. Now Ino persuaded the messengers to say it was foretold that the infertility would cease if
 Phrixus were sacrificed to Zeus. When Athamas heard that, he was forced by the inhabitants of the land to bring
 Phrixus to the altar. But Nephele caught him and her daughter up and gave them a ram with a golden fleece, which
 she had received from Hermes, and borne through the sky by the ram they crossed land and sea. But when they were
 over the sea which lies betwixt Sigeum and the Chersonese, Helle slipped into the deep and was drowned, and the
 sea was called Hellespont after her. But Phrixus came to the Colchians, whose king was Aeetes, son of the Sun
 and of Perseis, and brother of Circe and Pasiphae, whom Minos married. He received Phrixus and gave him one of
 his daughters, Chalciope. And Phrixus sacrificed the ram with the golden fleece to Zeus the god of Escape, and
 the fleece he gave to Aeetes, who nailed it to an oak in a grove of Ares. And Phrixus had children by Chalciope,
 to wit, Argus, Melas, Phrontis, and Cytisorus.

 [1.9.2] But afterwards Athamas was bereft also of the children of Ino through the wrath of Hera; for he went
 mad and shot Learchus with an arrow, and Ino cast herself and Melicertes into the sea. 143 Being banished from Boeotia, Athamas inquired of the god where he should
 dwell, and on receiving an oracle that he should dwell in whatever place he should be entertained by wild
 beasts, he traversed a great extent of country till he fell in with wolves that were devouring pieces of sheep;
 but when they saw him they abandoned their prey and fled. So Athamas settled in that country and named it
 Athamantia after himself; and he married Themisto, daughter of Hypseus, 144 and begat Leucon, Erythrius, Schoeneus, and Ptous. 

 [1.9.3] And Sisyphus, son of Aeolus, founded Ephyra, which is now called Corinth, 145 and married Merope, daughter of Atlas. They had a son Glaucus, who had by
 Eurymede a son Bellerophon, who slew the fire breathing Chimera. 146 But
 Sisyphus is punished in Hades by rolling a stone with his hands and head in the effort to heave it over the top;
 but push it as he will, it rebounds backward. 147 This punishment he
 endures for the sake of Aegina, daughter of Asopus; for when Zeus had secretly carried her off, Sisyphus is said
 to have betrayed the secret to Asopus, who was looking for her. 

 [1.9.4] Deion reigned over Phocis and married Diomede, daughter of Xuthus; and there were born to him a
 daughter, Asterodia, and sons, Aenetus, Actor, Phylacus, and Cephalus, who married Procris, daughter of
 Erechtheus. 148 But afterwards Dawn fell in love with him and carried him
 off. 

 [1.9.5] Perieres took possession of Messene and married Gorgophone, daughter of Perseus, by whom he had sons,
 to wit, Aphareus and Leucippus, 149 and Tyndareus, and also Icarius. But
 many say that Perieres was not the son of Aeolus but of Cynortas, son of Amyclas 150 ; so we shall narrate the history of the descendants of Perieres in
 dealing with the family of Atlas.

 [1.9.6] Magnes married a Naiad nymph, and sons were born to him, Polydectes and Dictys; these colonized
 Seriphus. 

 [1.9.7] Salmoneus at first dwelt in Thessaly, but afterwards he came to Elis and there founded a city. 151 And being arrogant and wishful to put himself on an equality with Zeus,
 he was punished for his impiety; for he said that he was himself Zeus, and he took away the sacrifices of the
 god and ordered them to be offered to himself; and by dragging dried hides, with bronze kettles, at his chariot,
 he said that he thundered, and by flinging lighted torches at the sky he said that he lightened. But Zeus struck
 him with a thunderbolt, and wiped out the city he had founded with all its inhabitants. 152 

 [1.9.8] Now Tyro, daughter of Salmoneus and Alcidice, was brought up by Cretheus, brother of Salmoneus, and
 conceived a passion for the river Enipeus, and often would she hie to its running waters and utter her plaint to
 them. But Poseidon in the likeness of Enipeus lay with her, 153 and she
 secretly gave birth to twin sons, whom she exposed. As the babes lay forlorn, a mare, belonging to some passing
 horsekeepers, kicked with its hoof one of the two infants and left a livid mark on its face. The horsekeeper
 took up both the children and reared them; and the one with the livid (pelion) mark he called Pelias, and the
 other Neleus. 154 When they were grown up, they discovered their mother
 and killed their stepmother Sidero. For knowing that their mother was ill-used by her, they attacked her, but
 before they could catch her she had taken refuge in the precinct of Hera. 155 However, Pelias cut her down on the very altars, and ever after he
 continued to treat Hera with contumely.

 [1.9.9] But afterwards the brothers fell out, and Neleus, being banished, came to Messene, and founded Pylus,
 and married Chloris, 156 daughter of Amphion, by whom he had a daughter,
 Pero, and sons, to wit, Taurus, Asterius, Pylaon, Deimachus, Eurybius, Epilaus, Phrasius, Eurymenes, Evagoras,
 Alastor, Nestor and Periclymenus, whom Poseidon granted the power of changing his shape. And when Hercules was
 ravaging Pylus, in the fight Periclymenus turned himself into a lion, a snake, and a bee, but was slain by
 Hercules with the other sons of Neleus. Nestor alone was saved, because he was brought up among the
 Gerenians. 157 He married Anaxibia, daughter of Cratieus, 158 and begat daughters, Pisidice and Polycaste, and sons, Perseus,
 Stratichus, Aretus, Echephron, Pisistratus, Antilochus, and Thrasymedes. 

 [1.9.10] But Pelias dwelt in Thessaly and married Anaxibia, daughter of Bias, but according to some his wife
 was Phylomache, daughter of Amphion; and he begat a son, Acastus, and daughters, Pisidice, Pelopia, Hippothoe,
 and Alcestis. 159 

 [1.9.11] Cretheus founded Iolcus and married Tyro, daughter of Salmoneus, by whom he had sons, Aeson, Amythaon,
 and Pheres. 160 Amythaon dwelt in Pylus and married Idomene, daughter of
 Pheres, and there were born to him two sons, Bias and Melampus. The latter lived in the country, and before his
 house there was an oak, in which there was a lair of snakes. His servants killed the snakes, but Melampus
 gathered wood and burnt the reptiles, and reared the young ones. And when the young were full grown, they stood
 beside him at each of his shoulders as he slept, and they purged his ears with their tongues. He started up in a
 great fright, but understood the voices of the birds flying overhead, and from what he learned from them he
 foretold to men what should come to pass. 161 He acquired besides the art
 of taking the auspices, and having fallen in with Apollo at the Alpheus he was ever after an excellent
 soothsayer.

 [1.9.12] Bias wooed Pero, daughter of Neleus. 162 But as there were many
 suitors for his daughter's hand, Neleus said that he would give her to him who should bring him the kine of
 Phylacus. These were in Phylace, and they were guarded by a dog which neither man nor beast could come near.
 Unable to steal these kine, Bias invited his brother to help him. Melampus promised to do so, and foretold that
 he should be detected in the act of stealing them, and that he should get the kine after being kept in bondage
 for a year. After making this promise he repaired to Phylace and, just as he had foretold, he was detected in
 the theft and kept a prisoner in a cell. When the year was nearly up, he heard the worms in the hidden part of
 the roof, one of them asking how much of the beam had been already gnawed through, and others answering that
 very little of it was left. At once he bade them transfer him to another cell, and not long after that had been
 done the cell fell in. Phylacus marvelled, and perceiving that he was an excellent soothsayer, he released him
 and invited him to say how his son Iphiclus might get children. Melampus promised to tell him, provided he got
 the kine. And having sacrificed two bulls and cut them in pieces he summoned the birds; and when a vulture came,
 he learned from it that once, when Phylacus was gelding rams, he laid down the knife, still bloody, beside
 Iphiclus, and that when the child was frightened and ran away, he stuck the knife on the sacred oak, 163 and the bark encompassed the knife and hid it. He said, therefore, that
 if the knife were found, and he scraped off the rust, and gave it to Iphiclus to drink for ten days, he would
 beget a son. Having learned these things from the vulture, Melampus found the knife, scraped the rust, and gave
 it to Iphiclus for ten days to drink, and a son Podarces was born to him. 164 But he drove the kine to Pylus, and having received the daughter of
 Neleus he gave her to his brother. For a time he continued to dwell in Messene, but when Dionysus drove the
 women of Argos mad, he healed them on condition of receiving part of the kingdom, and settled down there with
 Bias. 165 

 [1.9.13] Bias and Pero had a son Talaus, who married Lysimache, daughter of Abas, son of Melampus, and had by
 her Adrastus, Parthenopaeus, Pronax, Mecisteus, Aristomachus, and Eriphyle, whom Amphiaraus married.
 Parthenopaeus had a son Promachus, who marched with the Epigoni against Thebes 166 ; and Mecisteus had a son Euryalus, who went to Troy. 167 Pronax had a son Lycurgus; and Adrastus had by Amphithea, daughter of
 Pronax, three daughters, Argia, Deipyle, and Aegialia, and two sons, Aegialeus and Cyanippus. 

 [1.9.14] Pheres, son of Cretheus, founded Pherae in Thessaly and begat Admetus and Lycurgus. Lycurgus took up
 his abode at Nemea, and having married Eurydice, or, as some say, Amphithea, he begat Opheltes, afterwards
 called Archemorus. 168 

 [1.9.15] When Admetus reigned over Pherae, Apollo served him as his thrall, 169 while Admetus wooed Alcestis, daughter of Pelias. Now Pelias had promised
 to give his daughter to him who should yoke a lion and a boar to a car, and Apollo yoked and gave them to
 Admetus, who brought them to Pelias and so obtained Alcestis. 170 But in
 offering a sacrifice at his marriage, he forgot to sacrifice to Artemis; therefore when he opened the marriage
 chamber he found it full of coiled snakes. Apollo bade him appease the goddess and obtained as a favour of the
 Fates that, when Admetus should be about to die, he might be released from death if someone should choose
 voluntarily to die for him. And when the day of his death came neither his father nor his mother would die for
 him, but Alcestis died in his stead. But the Maiden 171 sent her up again,
 or, as some say, Hercules fought with Hades and brought her up to him. 172 

 [1.9.16] Aeson, son of Cretheus, had a son Jason by Polymede, daughter of Autolycus. Now Jason dwelt in Iolcus,
 of which Pelias was king after Cretheus. 173 But when Pelias consulted the
 oracle concerning the kingdom, the god warned him to beware of the man with a single sandal. At first the king
 understood not the oracle, but afterwards he apprehended it. For when he was offering a sacrifice at the sea to
 Poseidon, he sent for Jason, among many others, to participate in it. Now Jason loved husbandry and therefore
 abode in the country, but he hastened to the sacrifice, and in crossing the river Anaurus he lost a sandal in
 the stream and landed with only one. When Pelias saw him, he bethought him of the oracle, and going up to Jason
 asked him what, supposing he had the power, he would do if he had received an oracle that he should be murdered
 by one of the citizens. Jason answered, whether at haphazard or instigated by the angry Hera in order that Medea
 should prove a curse to Pelias, who did not honor Hera, “I would command him,” said he, “to
 bring the Golden Fleece.” No sooner did Pelias hear that than he bade him go in quest of the fleece. Now
 it was at Colchis in a grove of Ares, hanging on an oak and guarded by a sleepless dragon. 174 

 Sent to fetch the fleece, Jason called in the help of Argus, son of Phrixus; and Argus, by Athena's advice,
 built a ship of fifty oars named Argo after its builder; and at the prow Athena fitted in a speaking timber from
 the oak of Dodona. 175 When the ship was built, and he inquired of the
 oracle, the god gave him leave to assemble the nobles of Greece and sail away. And those who assembled were as
 follows 176 : Tiphys, son of Hagnias, who steered the ship; Orpheus, son of
 Oeagrus; Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas; Castor and Pollux, sons of Zeus; Telamon and Peleus, sons of Aeacus;
 Hercules, son of Zeus; Theseus, son of Aegeus; Idas and Lynceus, sons of Aphareus; Amphiaraus, son of Oicles;
 Caeneus, son of Coronus; Palaemon, son of Hephaestus or of Aetolus; Cepheus, son of Aleus; Laertes son of
 Arcisius; Autolycus, son of Hermes; Atalanta, daughter of Schoeneus; Menoetius, son of Actor; Actor, son of
 Hippasus; Admetus, son of Pheres; Acastus, son of Pelias; Eurytus, son of Hermes; Meleager, son of Oeneus;
 Ancaeus, son of Lycurgus; Euphemus, son of Poseidon; Poeas, son of Thaumacus; Butes, son of Teleon; Phanus and
 Staphylus, sons of Dionysus; Erginus, son of Poseidon; Periclymenus, son of Neleus; Augeas, son of the Sun;
 Iphiclus, son of Thestius; Argus, son of Phrixus; Euryalus, son of Mecisteus; Peneleos, son of Hippalmus;
 Leitus, son of Alector; Iphitus, son of Naubolus; Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of Ares; Asterius, son of
 Cometes; Polyphemus, son of Elatus.

 [1.9.17] These with Jason as admiral put to sea and touched at Lemnos. 177 At that time it chanced that Lemnos was bereft of men and ruled over by a
 queen, Hypsipyle, daughter of Thoas, the reason of which was as follows. The Lemnian women did not honor
 Aphrodite, and she visited them with a noisome smell; therefore their spouses took captive women from the
 neighboring country of Thrace and bedded with them. Thus dishonored, the Lemnian women murdered their fathers
 and husbands, but Hypsipyle alone saved her father Thoas by hiding him. So having put in to Lemnos, at that time
 ruled by women, the Argonauts had intercourse with the women, and Hypsipyle bedded with Jason and bore sons,
 Euneus and Nebrophonus. 

 [1.9.18] And after Lemnos they landed among the Doliones, of whom Cyzicus was king. 178 He received them kindly. But having put to sea from there by night and
 met with contrary winds, they lost their bearings and landed again among the Doliones. However, the Doliones,
 taking them for a Pelasgian army (for they were constantly harassed by the Pelasgians), joined battle with them
 by night in mutual ignorance of each other. The Argonauts slew many and among the rest Cyzicus; but by day, when
 they knew what they had done, they mourned and cut off their hair and gave Cyzicus a costly burial 179 ; and after the burial they sailed away and touched at Mysia. 180 

 [1.9.19] There they left Hercules and Polyphemus. For Hylas, son of Thiodamas, a minion of Hercules, had been
 sent to draw water and was ravished away by nymphs on account of his beauty. 181 But Polyphemus heard him cry out, and drawing his sword gave chase in the
 belief that he was being carried off by robbers. Falling in with Hercules, he told him; and while the two were
 seeking for Hylas, the ship put to sea. So Polyphemus founded a city Cius in Mysia and reigned as king 182 ; but Hercules returned to Argos. However Herodorus says that Hercules did
 not sail at all at that time, but served as a slave at the court of Omphale. But Pherecydes says that he was
 left behind at Aphetae in Thessaly, the Argo having declared with human voice that she could not bear his
 weight. Nevertheless Demaratus has recorded that Hercules sailed to Colchis; for Dionysius even affirms that he
 was the leader of the Argonauts. 183 

 [1.9.20] From Mysia they departed to the land of the Bebryces, which was ruled by King Amycus, son of Poseidon
 and a Bithynian nymph. 184 Being a doughty man he compelled the strangers
 that landed to box and in that way made an end of them. So going to the Argo as usual, he challenged the best
 man of the crew to a boxing match. Pollux undertook to box against him and killed him with a blow on the elbow.
 When the Bebryces made a rush at him, the chiefs snatched up their arms and put them to flight with great
 slaughter. 

 [1.9.21] Thence they put to sea and came to land at Salmydessus in Thrace, where dwelt Phineus, a seer who had
 lost the sight of both eyes. 185 Some say he was a son of Agenor, 186 but others that he was a son of Poseidon, and he is variously alleged to
 have been blinded by the gods for foretelling men the future; or by Boreas and the Argonauts because he blinded
 his own sons at the instigation of their stepmother 187 ; or by Poseidon,
 because he revealed to the children of Phrixus how they could sail from Colchis to Greece. The gods also sent
 the Harpies to him. These were winged female creatures, and when a table was laid for Phineus, they flew down
 from the sky and snatched up most of the victuals, and what little they left stank so that nobody could touch
 it. When the Argonauts would have consulted him about the voyage, he said that he would advise them about it if
 they would rid him of the Harpies. So the Argonauts laid a table of viands beside him, and the Harpies with a
 shriek suddenly pounced down and snatched away the food. When Zetes and Calais, the sons of Boreas, saw that,
 they drew their swords and, being winged, pursued them through the air. Now it was fated that the Harpies should
 perish by the sons of Boreas, and that the sons of Boreas should die when they could not catch up a fugitive. So
 the Harpies were pursued and one of them fell into the river Tigres in Peloponnese, the river that is now called
 Harpys after her; some call her Nicothoe, but others Aellopus. But the other, named Ocypete or, according to
 others, Ocythoe ( but Hesiod calls her Ocypode) 188 fled by the Propontis
 till she came to the Echinadian Islands, which are now called Strophades after her; for when she came to them
 she turned (estraphe) and being at the shore fell for very weariness with her pursuer. But Apollonius in the
 Argonautica says that the Harpies were pursued to the Strophades Islands and suffered no harm, having sworn an
 oath that they would wrong Phineus no more. 189 

 [1.9.22] Being rid of the Harpies, Phineus revealed to the Argonauts the course of their voyage, and advised
 them about the Clashing Rocks 190 in the sea. These were huge cliffs,
 which, dashed together by the force of the winds, closed the sea passage. Thick was the mist that swept over
 them, and loud the crash, and it was impossible for even the birds to pass between them. So he told them to let
 fly a dove between the rocks, and, if they saw it pass safe through, to thread the narrows with an easy mind,
 but if they saw it perish, then not to force a passage. When they heard that, they put to sea, and on nearing
 the rocks let fly a dove from the prow, and as she flew the clash of the rocks nipped off the tip of her tail.
 So, waiting till the rocks had recoiled, with hard rowing and the help of Hera, they passed through, the
 extremity of the ship's ornamented poop being shorn away right round. Henceforth the Clashing Rocks stood still;
 for it was fated that, so soon as a ship had made the passage, they should come to rest completely.

 [1.9.23] The Argonauts now arrived among the Mariandynians, and there King Lycus received them kindly. 191 There died Idmon the seer of a wound inflicted by a boar 192 ; and there too died Tiphys, and Ancaeus undertook to steer the
 ship. 193 

 And having sailed past the Thermodon and the Caucasus they came to the river Phasis, which is in the Colchian
 land. 194 When the ship was brought into port, Jason repaired to Aeetes,
 and setting forth the charge laid on him by Pelias invited him to give him the fleece. The other promised to
 give it if single-handed he would yoke the brazen-footed bulls. These were two wild bulls that he had, of
 enormous size, a gift of Hephaestus; they had brazen feet and puffed fire from their mouths. These creatures
 Aeetes ordered him to yoke and to sow dragon's teeth; for he had got from Athena half of the dragon's teeth
 which Cadmus sowed in Thebes. 195 While Jason puzzled how he could yoke
 the bulls, Medea conceived a passion for him; now she was a witch, daughter of Aeetes and Idyia, daughter of
 Ocean. And fearing lest he might be destroyed by the bulls, she, keeping the thing from her father, promised to
 help him to yoke the bulls and to deliver to him the fleece, if he would swear to have her to wife and would
 take her with him on the voyage to Greece. When Jason swore to do so, she gave him a drug with which she bade
 him anoint his shield, spear, and body when he was about to yoke the bulls; for she said that, anointed with it,
 he could for a single day be harmed neither by fire nor by iron. And she signified to him that, when the teeth
 were sown, armed men would spring up from the ground against him; and when he saw a knot of them he was to throw
 stones into their midst from a distance, and when they fought each other about that, he was taken to kill
 them. 196 On hearing that, Jason anointed himself with the drug, 197 and being come to the grove of the temple he sought the bulls, and though
 they charged him with a flame of fire, he yoked them. 198 And when he had
 sowed the teeth, there rose armed men from the ground; and where he saw several together, he pelted them unseen
 with stones, and when they fought each other he drew near and slew them. 199 But though the bulls were yoked, Aeetes did not give the fleece; for he
 wished to burn down the Argo and kill the crew. But before he could do so, Medea brought Jason by night to the
 fleece, and having lulled to sleep by her drugs the dragon that guarded it, she possessed herself of the fleece
 and in Jason's company came to the Argo. 200 She was attended, too, by her
 brother Apsyrtus. And with them the Argonauts put to sea by night. 201 

 [1.9.24] When Aeetes discovered the daring deeds done by Medea, he started off in pursuit of the ship; but when
 she saw him near, Medea murdered her brother and cutting him limb from limb threw the pieces into the deep.
 Gathering the child's limbs, Aeetes fell behind in the pursuit; wherefore he turned back, and, having buried the
 rescued limbs of his child, he called the place Tomi. But he sent out many of the Colchians to search for the
 Argo, threatening that, if they did not bring Medea to him, they should suffer the punishment due to her; so
 they separated and pursued the search in divers places.

 When the Argonauts were already sailing past the Eridanus river, Zeus sent a furious storm upon them, and drove
 them out of their course, because he was angry at the murder of Apsyrtus. And as they were sailing past the
 Apsyrtides Islands, the ship spoke, saying that the wrath of Zeus would not cease unless they journeyed to
 Ausonia and were purified by Circe for the murder of Apsyrtus. 202 So when
 they had sailed past the Ligurian and Celtic nations and had voyaged through the Sardinian Sea, they skirted
 Tyrrhenia and came to Aeaea, where they supplicated Circe and were purified. 203 

 [1.9.25] And as they sailed past the Sirens, 204 Orpheus restrained the
 Argonauts by chanting a counter-melody. Butes alone swam off to the Sirens, but Aphrodite carried him away and
 settled him in Lilybaeum.

 After the Sirens, the ship encountered Charybdis and Scylla and the Wandering Rocks, 205 above which a great flame and smoke were seen rising. But Thetis with the
 Nereids steered the ship through them at the summons of Hera.

 Having passed by the Island of Thrinacia, where are the kine of the Sun, 206 they came to Corcyra, the island of the Phaeacians, of which Alcinous was
 king. 207 But when the Colchians could not find the ship, some of them
 settled at the Ceraunian mountains, and some journeyed to Illyria and colonized the Apsyrtides Islands. But some
 came to the Phaeacians, and finding the Argo there, they demanded of Alcinous that he should give up Medea. He
 answered, that if she already knew Jason, he would give her to him, but that if she were still a maid he would
 send her away to her father. 208 However, Arete, wife of Alcinous,
 anticipated matters by marrying Medea to Jason 209 ; hence the Colchians
 settled down among the Phaeacians 210 and the Argonauts put to sea with
 Medea.

 [1.9.26] Sailing by night they encountered a violent storm, and Apollo, taking his stand on the Melantian
 ridges, flashed lightning down, shooting a shaft into the sea. Then they perceived an island close at hand, and
 anchoring there they named it Anaphe, because it had loomed up (anaphanenai) unexpectedly. So they founded an
 altar of Radiant Apollo, and having offered sacrifice they betook them to feasting; and twelve handmaids, whom
 Arete had given to Medea, jested merrily with the chiefs; whence it is still customary for the women to jest at
 the sacrifice. 211 

 Putting to sea from there, they were hindered from touching at Crete by Talos. 212 Some say that he was a man of the Brazen Race, others that he was given
 to Minos by Hephaestus; he was a brazen man, but some say that he was a bull. He had a single vein extending
 from his neck to his ankles, and a bronze nail was rammed home at the end of the vein. This Talos kept guard,
 running round the island thrice every day; wherefore, when he saw the Argo standing inshore, he pelted it as
 usual with stones. His death was brought about by the wiles of Medea, whether, as some say, she drove him mad by
 drugs, or, as others say, she promised to make him immortal and then drew out the nail, so that all the ichor
 gushed out and he died. But some say that Poeas shot him dead in the ankle.

 After tarrying a single night there they put in to Aegina to draw water, and a contest arose among them
 concerning the drawing of the water. 213 Thence they sailed betwixt Euboea
 and Locris and came to Iolcus, having completed the whole voyage in four months. 

 [1.9.27] Now Pelias, despairing of the return of the Argonauts, would have killed Aeson; but he requested to be
 allowed to take his own life, and in offering a sacrifice drank freely of the bull's blood and died. 214 And Jason's mother cursed Pelias and hanged herself, 215 leaving behind an infant son Promachus; but Pelias slew even the son whom
 she had left behind. 216 On his return Jason surrendered the fleece, but
 though he longed to avenge his wrongs he bided his time. At that time he sailed with the chiefs to the Isthmus
 and dedicated the ship to Poseidon, but afterwards he exhorted Medea to devise how he could punish Pelias. So
 she repaired to the palace of Pelias and persuaded his daughters to make mince meat of their father and boil
 him, promising to make him young again by her drugs; and to win their confidence she cut up a ram and made it
 into a lamb by boiling it. So they believed her, made mince meat of their father and boiled him. 217 But Acastus buried his father with the help of the inhabitants of Iolcus,
 and he expelled Jason and Medea from Iolcus.

 [1.9.28] They went to Corinth, and lived there happily for ten years, till Creon, king of Corinth, betrothed
 his daughter Glauce to Jason, who married her and divorced Medea. But she invoked the gods by whom Jason had
 sworn, and after often upbraiding him with his ingratitude she sent the bride a robe steeped in poison, which
 when Glauce had put on, she was consumed with fierce fire along with her father, who went to her rescue. 218 But Mermerus and Pheres, the children whom Medea had by Jason, she
 killed, and having got from the Sun a car drawn by winged dragons she fled on it to Athens. 219 Another tradition is that on her flight she left behind her children, who
 were still infants, setting them as suppliants on the altar of Hera of the Height; but the Corinthians removed
 them and wounded them to death. 220 

 Medea came to Athens, and being there married to Aegeus bore him a son Medus. Afterwards, however, plotting
 against Theseus, she was driven a fugitive from Athens with her son. 221 
 But he conquered many barbarians and called the whole country under him Media, 222 and marching against the Indians he met his death. And Medea came unknown
 to Colchis, and finding that Aeetes had been deposed by his brother Perses, she killed Perses and restored the
 kingdom to her father. 223 

 SEARCH THEOI

 CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

 Aeschylus, Agamemnon 

 Aeschylus, Eumenides 

 Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 

 Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 

 Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 

 Aeschylus, Suppliant Women 

 Aeschylus, Fragments 

 Alcman, Fragments 

 Apollodorus, The Library 

 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 

 Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena 

 Bion, Poems 

 Callimachus, Hymns 

 Callistratus, Descriptions 

 Claudian, Gigantomachia 

 Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 

 Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks 

 Clement, Recognitions 

 Colluthus, Rape of Helen 

 Dares Phrygius 

 Dictys Cretensis 

 Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 

 Epic Cycle Fragments 

 Fulgentius, Mythologies 

 Greek Lyric Fragments 

 Hesiod, Shield of Heracles 

 Hesiod, Theogony 

 Hesiod, Works and Days 

 Hesiod, Fragments 

 Homer, Iliad 

 Homer, Odyssey 

 Homeric Hymns 

 Hyginus, Astronomica 

 Hyginus, Fabulae 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 

 Lycophron, Alexandra 

 Moschus, Poems 

 Nonnus, Dionysiaca 

 Orphic Hymns 

 Ovid, Fasti 

 Ovid, Heroides 

 Ovid, Metamorphoses 

 Parthenius, Love Romances 

 Pattern Poems 

 Pausanias, Description of Greece 

 Philostratus the Elder, Imagines 

 Philostratus the Younger, Imagines 

 Plutarch, Life of Theseus 

 Plutarch, Parallel Stories 

 Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy 

 Seneca, Agamemnon 

 Seneca, Hercules Furens 

 Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus 

 Seneca, Medea 

 Seneca, Oedipus 

 Seneca, Phaedra 

 Seneca, Phoenissae 

 Seneca, Thyestes 

 Seneca, Troades 

 Statius, Achilleid 

 Statius, Thebaid 

 Theocritus, Idylls 

 Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios 

 Tzetzes, Chiliades 

 Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica 

 Virgil, Aeneid 

 Virgil, Eclogues 

 Virgil, Georgics 

 RECENT ARTICLES 

 Who Was Achilles A Warrior? 

 What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules? 

 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z 

--> 

 .

 Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

 Contact Us