.

 Toggle navigation 
 Theoi Project - Classical Texts
 Library 

 LIBRARY HOME 
 GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
 GREEK GODS 
 
 Olympian Gods 
 Primordial Gods 
 Titan Gods 
 Sky Gods 
 Sea Gods 
 Rustic Gods 
 Underworld Gods 
 Daemones-Spirits 
 Nymphs 
 more >> 

 BESTIARY 
 HEROES 
 MISCELLANY 
 
 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z 
 Family Tree of the Gods 
 Legendary Tribes 
 Legendary Creatures 
 Star Myths 
 Plant & Flower Myths 

 GALLERY 

 Classical Texts
 Library >> Apollodorus,
 The Library >> Book 3 
 APOLLODORUS, THE LIBRARY 3 

 THE LIBRARY CONTENTS

 BOOK 1 

 1 . Theogony: Birth of Zeus

 2 . Theogony: War of the Titans

 3 . Theogony: Olympian Gods

 4 . Apollo & Artemis

 5 . Demeter & Persephone

 6 . War of the Giants, Typhon

 7 . Prometheus, Deucalion, Daughters of Aeolus

 8 . Oeneus, Meleager, Tydeus

 9 . Sons of Aeolus, Melampus, Admetus, Pelias, Argonauts

 BOOK 2 

 1 . Io, Danaides

 2 . Proetus, Proetides

 3 . Bellerophon

 4 . Perseus, Sons of Perseus, Amphitryon, Birth of Heracles

 5 . Twelve Labours of Heracles

 6 . Wars of Heracles

 7 . Heracleidae

 BOOK 3 

 1 . Europa, Minos, Pasiphae

 2 . Catreus

 3 . Glaucus

 4 . Cadmus, Semele, Actaeon

 5 . Dionysus, Antiope, Amphion & Zethus, Oedipus

 6 . Seven Against Thebes

 7 . Epigoni

 8 . Lycaon, Callisto

 9 . Auge, Atalanta

 10 . Pleiades, Hermes, Coronis, Asclepius, Leda, Suitors of Helen

 11 . Dioscuri

 12 . Dardanus, Ilus, Priam, Aeacus, Telamon

 13 . Peleus & Thetis

 14 . Cecrops, Adonis, Tereus & Procne, Erichthonius

 15 . Cephalus, Oreithyia, Eumolpus, Aegeus

 16 . Theseus

 EPITOME 

 1 . Theseus cont.

 2 . Tantalus, Pelops, Atreus

 3 . Trojan War: Antehomerica

 4 . Trojan War: Iliad

 5 . Trojan War: Posthomerica

 6 . Trojan War: Returns

 7 . Odyssey & Telegonia

 THE LIBRARY BOOK 3, TRANSLATED BY J. G. FRAZER

 [3.1.1] Having now run over the family of Inachus and described them from Belus down to the
 Heraclids, we have next to speak of the house of Agenor. For as I have said, 1 Libya had by Poseidon two sons, Belus and Agenor. Now Belus reigned over the
 Egyptians and begat the aforesaid sons; but Agenor went to Phoenicia, married Telephassa, and begat a daughter
 Europa and three sons, Cadmus, Phoenix, and Cilix. 2 But some say that
 Europa was a daughter not of Agenor but of Phoenix. 3 Zeus loved her, and
 turning himself into a tame bull, he mounted her on his back and conveyed her through the sea to Crete. 4 There Zeus bedded with her, and she bore Minos, Sarpedon, and
 Rhadamanthys 5 ; but according to Homer, Sarpedon was a son of Zeus by
 Laodamia, daughter of Bellerophon. 6 On the disappearance of Europa her
 father Agenor sent out his sons in search of her, telling them not to return until they had found Europa. With
 them her mother, Telephassa, and Thasus, son of Poseidon, or according to Pherecydes, of Cilix, 7 went forth in search of her. But when, after diligent search, they could not
 find Europa, they gave up the thought of returning home, and took up their abode in divers places; Phoenix
 settled in Phoenicia; Cilix settled near Phoenicia, and all the country subject to himself near the river
 Pyramus he called Cilicia; and Cadmus and Telephassa took up their abode in Thrace and in like manner Thasus
 founded a city Thasus in an island off Thrace and dwelt there. 8 

 [3.1.2] Now Asterius, prince of the Cretans, married Europa and brought up her children. 9 But when they were grown up, they quarrelled with each other; for they loved
 a boy called Miletus, son of Apollo by Aria, daughter of Cleochus. 10 As
 the boy was more friendly to Sarpedon, Minos went to war and had the better of it, and the others fled. Miletus
 landed in Caria and there founded a city which he called Miletus after himself; and Sarpedon allied himself with
 Cilix, who was at war with the Lycians, and having stipulated for a share of the country, he became king of
 Lycia. 11 And Zeus granted him to live for three generations. But some say
 that they loved Atymnius, the son of Zeus and Cassiepea, and that it was about him that they quarrelled.
 Rhadamanthys legislated for the islanders 12 but afterwards he fled to
 Boeotia and married Alcmena 13 ; and since his departure from the world he
 acts as judge in Hades along with Minos. Minos, residing in Crete, passed laws, and married Pasiphae, daughter
 of the Sun 14 and Perseis; but Asclepiades says that his wife was Crete,
 daughter of Asterius. He begat sons, to wit, Catreus, 15 Deucalion,
 Glaucus, and Androgeus: and daughters, to wit, Acalle, Xenodice, Ariadne, Phaedra; and by a nymph Paria he had
 Eurymedon, Nephalion, Chryses, and Philolaus; and by Dexithea he had Euxanthius.

 [3.1.3] Asterius dying childless, Minos wished to reign over Crete, but his claim was opposed. So he alleged
 that he had received the kingdom from the gods, and in proof of it he said that whatever he prayed for would be
 done. And in sacrificing to Poseidon he prayed that a bull might appear from the depths, promising to sacrifice
 it when it appeared. Poseidon did send him up a fine bull, and Minos obtained the kingdom, but he sent the bull
 to the herds and sacrificed another. 16 [Being the first to obtain the
 dominion of the sea, he extended his rule over almost all the islands.] 17 

 [3.1.4] But angry at him for not sacrificing the bull, Poseidon made the animal savage, and contrived that
 Pasiphae should conceive a passion for it. 18 In her love for the bull she
 found an accomplice in Daedalus, an architect, who had been banished from Athens for murder. 19 He constructed a wooden cow on wheels, took it, hollowed it out in the
 inside, sewed it up in the hide of a cow which he had skinned, and set it in the meadow in which the bull used
 to graze. Then he introduced Pasiphae into it; and the bull came and coupled with it, as if it were a real cow.
 And she gave birth to Asterius, who was called the Minotaur. He had the face of a bull, but the rest of him was
 human; and Minos, in compliance with certain oracles, shut him up and guarded him in the Labyrinth. Now the
 Labyrinth which Daedalus constructed was a chamber “that with its tangled windings perplexed the outward
 way.” 20 The story of the Minotaur, and Androgeus, and Phaedra, and
 Ariadne, I will tell hereafter in my account of Theseus. 21 

 [3.2.1] But Catreus, son of Minos, had three daughters, Aerope, Clymene, and Apemosyne, and a
 son, Althaemenes. 22 When Catreus inquired of the oracle how his life
 should end, the god said that he would die by the hand of one of his children. Now Catreus hid the oracles, but
 Althaemenes heard of them, and fearing to be his father's murderer, he set out from Crete with his sister
 Apemosyne, and put in at a place in Rhodes, and having taken possession of it he called it Cretinia. And having
 ascended the mountain called Atabyrium, he beheld the islands round about; and descrying Crete also and calling
 to mind the gods of his fathers he founded an altar of Atabyrian Zeus. 23 
 But not long afterwards he became the murderer of his sister. For Hermes loved her, and as she fled from him and
 he could not catch her, because she excelled him in speed of foot, he spread fresh hides on the path, on which,
 returning from the spring, she slipped and so was deflowered. She revealed to her brother what had happened, but
 he, deeming the god a mere pretext, kicked her to death.

 [3.2.2] And Catreus gave Aerope and Clymene to Nauplius to sell into foreign lands; and of these two Aerope
 became the wife of Plisthenes, who begat Agamemnon and Menelaus; and Clymene became the wife of Nauplius, who
 became the father of Oeax and Palamedes. But afterwards in the grip of old age Catreus yearned to transmit the
 kingdom to his son Althaemenes, and went for that purpose to Rhodes. And having landed from the ship with the
 heroes at a desert place of the island, he was chased by the cowherds, who imagined that they were pirates on a
 raid. He told them the truth, but they could not hear him for the barking of the dogs, and while they pelted him
 Althaemenes arrived and killed him with the cast of a javelin, not knowing him to be Catreus. Afterwards when he
 learned the truth, he prayed and disappeared in a chasm.

 [3.3.1] To Deucalion were born Idomeneus and Crete and a bastard son Molus. 24 But Glaucus, while he was yet a child, in chasing a mouse fell into a jar
 of honey and was drowned. 25 On his disappearance Minos made a great search
 and consulted diviners as to how he should find him. The Curetes told him that in his herds he had a cow of
 three different colors, and that the man who could best describe that cow's color would also restore his son to
 him alive. 26 So when the diviners were assembled, Polyidus, son of
 Coeranus, compared the color of the cow to the fruit of the bramble, and being compelled to seek for the child
 he found him by means of a sort of divination. 27 But Minos declaring that
 he must recover him alive, he was shut up with the dead body. And while he was in great perplexity, he saw a
 serpent going towards the corpse. He threw a stone and killed it, fearing to be killed himself if any harm
 befell the body. 28 But another serpent came, and, seeing the former one
 dead, departed, and then returned, bringing a herb, and placed it on the whole body of the other; and no sooner
 was the herb so placed upon it than the dead serpent came to life. Surprised at this sight, Polyidus applied the
 same herb to the body of Glaucus and raised him from the dead. 29 

 [3.3.2] Minos had now got back his son, but even so he did not suffer Polyidus to depart to Argos until he had
 taught Glaucus the art of divination. Polyidus taught him on compulsion, and when he was sailing away he bade
 Glaucus spit into his mouth. Glaucus did so and forgot the art of divination. 30 Thus much must suffice for my account of the descendants of Europa. 

 [3.4.1] When Telephassa died, Cadmus buried her, and after being hospitably received by the
 Thracians he came to Delphi to inquire about Europa. The god told him not to trouble about Europa, but to be
 guided by a cow, and to found a city wherever she should fall down for weariness. 31 After receiving such an oracle he journeyed through Phocis; then falling in
 with a cow among the herds of Pelagon, he followed it behind. And after traversing Boeotia, it sank down where
 is now the city of Thebes. Wishing to sacrifice the cow to Athena, he sent some of his companions to draw water
 from the spring of Ares. But a dragon, which some said was the offspring of Ares, guarded the spring and
 destroyed most of those that were sent. In his indignation Cadmus killed the dragon, and by the advice of Athena
 sowed its teeth. When they were sown there rose from the ground armed men whom they called Sparti. 32 These slew each other, some in a chance brawl, and some in ignorance. But
 Pherecydes says that when Cadmus saw armed men growing up out of the ground, he flung stones at them, and they,
 supposing that they were being pelted by each other, came to blows. However, five of them survived, Echion,
 Udaeus, Chthonius, Hyperenor, and Pelorus. 33 

 [3.4.2] But Cadmus, to atone for the slaughter, served Ares for an eternal year; and the year was then
 equivalent to eight years of our reckoning. 34 

 After his servitude Athena procured for him the kingdom, and Zeus gave him to wife Harmonia, daughter of
 Aphrodite and Ares. And all the gods quitted the sky, and feasting in the Cadmea celebrated the marriage with
 hymns. 35 Cadmus gave her a robe and the necklace wrought by Hephaestus,
 which some say was given to Cadmus by Hephaestus, but Pherecydes says that it was given by Europa, who had
 received it from Zeus. 36 And to Cadmus were born daughters, Autonoe, Ino,
 Semele, Agave, and a son Polydorus. 37 Ino was married to Athamas, Autonoe
 to Aristaeus, and Agave to Echion. 

 [3.4.3] But Zeus loved Semele and bedded with her unknown to Hera. 38 Now
 Zeus had agreed to do for her whatever she asked, and deceived by Hera she asked that he would come to her as he
 came when he was wooing Hera. Unable to refuse, Zeus came to her bridal chamber in a chariot, with lightnings
 and thunderings, and launched a thunderbolt. But Semele expired of fright, and Zeus, snatching the sixth-month
 abortive child 39 from the fire, sewed it in his thigh. On the death of
 Semele the other daughters of Cadmus spread a report that Semele had bedded with a mortal man, and had falsely
 accused Zeus, and that therefore she had been blasted by thunder. But at the proper time Zeus undid the stitches
 and gave birth to Dionysus, and entrusted him to Hermes. And he conveyed him to Ino and Athamas, and persuaded
 them to rear him as a girl. 40 But Hera indignantly drove them mad, and
 Athamas hunted his elder son Learchus as a deer and killed him, 41 and Ino
 threw Melicertes into a boiling cauldron, 42 then carrying it with the dead
 child she sprang into the deep. And she herself is called Leucothea, and the boy is called Palaemon, such being
 the names they get from sailors; for they succour storm-tossed mariners. 43 
 And the Isthmian games were instituted by Sisyphus in honor of Melicertes. 44 But Zeus eluded the wrath of Hera by turning Dionysus into a kid, 45 and Hermes took him and brought him to the nymphs who dwelt at Nysa in
 Asia, whom Zeus afterwards changed into stars and named them the Hyades. 46 

 [3.4.4] Autonoe and Aristaeus had a son Actaeon, who was bred by Chiron to be a hunter and then afterwards was
 devoured on Cithaeron by his own dogs. 47 He perished in that way,
 according to Acusilaus, because Zeus was angry at him for wooing Semele; but according to the more general
 opinion, it was because he saw Artemis bathing. And they say that the goddess at once transformed him into a
 deer, and drove mad the fifty dogs in his pack, which devoured him unwittingly. Actaeon being gone, the dogs
 sought their master howling lamentably, and in the search they came to the cave of Chiron, who fashioned an
 image of Actaeon, which soothed their grief. 

 [The names of Actaeon's dogs from the . . . So now surrounding his fair body, as it were that of a beast, the
 strong dogs rent it. Near Arcena first . . . after her a mighty brood, Lynceus and Balius goodly-footed, and
 Amarynthus. -- And these he enumerated continuously by name. And then Actaeon perished at the instigation of
 Zeus. For the first that drank their master's black blood were Spartus and Omargus and Bores, the swift on the
 track. These first ate of Actaeon and lapped his blood. And after them others rushed on him eagerly . . . to be
 a remedy for grievous pains to men.]

 [3.5.1] Dionysus discovered the vine, 48 and being driven
 mad by Hera 49 he roamed about Egypt and Syria. At first he was received by
 Proteus, king of Egypt, 50 but afterwards he arrived at Cybela in
 Phrygia. 51 And there, after he had been purified by Rhea and learned the
 rites of initiation, he received from her the costume and hastened through Thrace against the Indians. But
 Lycurgus, son of Dryas, was king of the Edonians, who dwell beside the river Strymon, and he was the first who
 insulted and expelled him. 52 Dionysus took refuge in the sea with Thetis,
 daughter of Nereus, and the Bacchanals were taken prisoners together with the multitude of Satyrs that attended
 him. But afterwards the Bacchanals were suddenly released, and Dionysus drove Lycurgus mad. And in his madness
 he struck his son Dryas dead with an axe, imagining that he was lopping a branch of a vine, and when he had cut
 off his son's extremities, 53 he recovered his senses. 54 But the land remaining barren, the god declared oracularly that it would
 bear fruit if Lycurgus were put to death. On hearing that, the Edonians led him to Mount Pangaeum and bound him,
 and there by the will of Dionysus he died, destroyed by horses. 55 

 [3.5.2] Having traversed Thrace and the whole of India and set up pillars there, 56 he came to Thebes, and forced the women to abandon their houses and rave in
 Bacchic frenzy on Cithaeron. But Pentheus, whom Agave bore to Echion, had succeeded Cadmus in the kingdom, and
 he attempted to put a stop to these proceedings. And coming to Cithaeron to spy on the Bacchanals, he was torn
 limb from limb by his mother Agave in a fit of madness; for she thought he was a wild beast. 57 And having shown the Thebans that he was a god, Dionysus came to Argos, and
 there again, because they did not honor him, he drove the women mad, and they on the mountains devoured the
 flesh of the infants whom they carried at their breasts. 58 

 [3.5.3] And wishing to be ferried across from Icaria to Naxos he hired a pirate ship of Tyrrhenians. But when
 they had put him on board, they sailed past Naxos and made for Asia, intending to sell him. Howbeit, he turned
 the mast and oars into snakes, and filled the vessel with ivy and the sound of flutes. And the pirates went mad,
 and leaped into the sea, and were turned into dolphins. 59 Thus men
 perceived that he was a god and honored him; and having brought up his mother from Hades and named her Thyone,
 he ascended up with her to heaven. 60 

 [3.5.4] But Cadmus and Harmonia quitted Thebes and went to the Encheleans. As the Encheleans were being
 attacked by the Illyrians, the god declared by an oracle that they would get the better of the Illyrians if they
 had Cadmus and Harmonia as their leaders. They believed him, and made them their leaders against the Illyrians,
 and got the better of them. And Cadmus reigned over the Illyrians, and a son Illyrius was born to him. But
 afterwards he was, along with Harmonia, turned into a serpent and sent away by Zeus to the Elysian
 Fields. 61 

 [3.5.5] Polydorus, having become king of Thebes, married Nycteis, daughter of Nycteus, son of Chthonius, and
 begat Labdacus, who perished after Pentheus because he was like-minded with him. 62 But Labdacus having left a year-old son, Laius, the government was usurped
 by Lycus, brother of Nycteus, so long as Laius was a child. Both of them 63 
 had fled [from Euboea] because they had killed Phlegyas, son of Ares and Dotis the Boeotian, 64 and they took up their abode at Hyria, and thence having come to Thebes,
 they were enrolled as citizens through their friendship with Pentheus. So after being chosen commander-in-chief
 by the Thebans, Lycus compassed the supreme power and reigned for twenty years, but was murdered by Zethus and
 Amphion for the following reason. Antiope was a daughter of Nycteus, and Zeus had intercourse with her. 65 When she was with child, and her father threatened her, she ran away to
 Epopeus at Sicyon and was married to him. In a fit of despondency Nycteus killed himself, after charging Lycus
 to punish Epopeus and Antiope. Lycus marched against Sicyon, subdued it, slew Epopeus, and led Antiope away
 captive. On the way she gave birth to two sons at Eleurethae in Boeotia. The infants were exposed, but a
 neatherd found and reared them, and he called the one Zethus and the other Amphion. Now Zethus paid attention to
 cattle-breeding, but Amphion practised minstrelsy, for Hermes had given him a lyre. 66 But Lycus and his wife Dirce imprisoned Antiope and treated her
 despitefully. Howbeit, one day her bonds were loosed of themselves, and unknown to her keepers she came to her
 sons cottage, begging that they would take her in. They recognized their mother and slew Lycus, but Dirce they
 tied to a bull, and flung her dead body into the spring that is called Dirce after her. And having succeeded to
 the sovereignty they fortified the city, the stones following Amphion's lyre 67 ; and they expelled Laius. 68 He
 resided in Peloponnese, being hospitably received by Pelops; and while he taught Chrysippus, the son of Pelops,
 to drive a chariot, he conceived a passion for the lad and carried him off. 69 

 [3.5.6] Zethus married Thebe, after whom the city of Thebes is named; and Amphion married Niobe, daughter of
 Tantalus, 70 who bore seven sons, Sipylus, Eupinytus, Ismenus,
 Damasichthon, Agenor, Phaedimus, Tantalus, and the same number of daughters, Ethodaia (or, as some say, Neaera),
 Cleodoxa, Astyoche, Phthia, Pelopia, Astycratia, and Ogygia, But Hesiod says that they had ten sons and ten
 daughters; Herodorus that they had two male children and three female; and Homer that they had six sons and six
 daughters. Being blessed with children, Niobe said that she was more blessed with children than Latona. Stung by
 the taunt, Latona incited Artemis and Apollo against them, and Artemis shot down the females in the house, and
 Apollo killed all the males together as they were hunting on Cithaeron. Of the males Amphion alone was saved,
 and of the females Chloris the elder, whom Neleus married. But according to Telesilla there were saved Amyclas
 and Meliboea, 71 and Amphion also was shot by them. 72 But Niobe herself quitted Thebes and went to her father Tantalus at
 Sipylus, and there, on praying to Zeus, she was transformed into a stone, and tears flow night and day from the
 stone.

 [3.5.7] After Amphion's death Laius succeeded to the kingdom. And he married a daughter of Menoeceus; some say
 that she was Jocasta, and some that she was Epicasta. 73 The oracle had
 warned him not to beget a son, for the son that should be begotten would kill his father; nevertheless, flushed
 with wine, he had intercourse with his wife. And when the babe was born he pierced the child's ankles with
 brooches and gave it to a herdsman to expose. But the herdsman exposed it on Cithaeron; and the neatherds of
 Polybus, king of Corinth, found the infant and brought it to his wife Periboea. 74 She adopted him and passed him off as her own, and after she had healed his
 ankles she called him Oedipus, giving him that name on account of his swollen feet. 75 When the boy grew up and excelled his fellows in strength, they spitefully
 twitted him with being supposititious. He inquired of Periboea, but could learn nothing; so he went to Delphi
 and inquired about his true parents. The god told him not to go to his native land, because he would murder his
 father and lie with his mother. On hearing that, and believing himself to be the son of his nominal parents, he
 left Corinth, and riding in a chariot through Phocis he fell in with Laius driving in a chariot in a certain
 narrow road. 76 And when Polyphontes, the herald of Laius, ordered him to
 make way and killed one of his horses because he disobeyed and delayed, Oedipus in a rage killed both
 Polyphontes and Laius, and arrived in Thebes.

 [3.5.8] Laius was buried by Damasistratus, king of Plataea, 77 and Creon,
 son of Menoeceus, succeeded to the kingdom. In his reign a heavy calamity befell Thebes. For Hera sent the
 Sphinx, 78 whose mother was Echidna and her father Typhon; and she had the
 face of a woman, the breast and feet and tail of a lion, and the wings of a bird. And having learned a riddle
 from the Muses, she sat on Mount Phicium, and propounded it to the Thebans. And the riddle was this: -- What is
 that which has one voice and yet becomes four-footed and two-footed and three-footed? Now the Thebans were in
 possession of an oracle which declared that they should be rid of the Sphinx whenever they had read her riddle;
 so they often met and discussed the answer, and when they could not find it the Sphinx used to snatch away one
 of them and gobble him up. When many had perished, and last of all Creon's son Haemon, Creon made proclamation
 that to him who should read the riddle he would give both the kingdom and the wife of Laius. On hearing that,
 Oedipus found the solution, declaring that the riddle of the Sphinx referred to man; for as a babe he is
 four-footed, going on four limbs, as an adult he is two-footed, and as an old man he gets besides a third
 support in a staff. So the Sphinx threw herself from the citadel, and Oedipus both succeeded to the kingdom and
 unwittingly married his mother, and begat sons by her, Polynices and Eteocles, and daughters, Ismene and
 Antigone. 79 But some say the children were borne to him by Eurygania,
 daughter of Hyperphas. 80 

 [3.5.9] When the secret afterwards came to light, Jocasta hanged herself in a noose, 81 and Oedipus was driven from Thebes, after he had put out his eyes and
 cursed his sons, who saw him cast out of the city without lifting a hand to help him. 82 And having come with Antigone to Colonus in Attica, where is the precinct
 of the Eumenides, he sat down there as a suppliant, was kindly received by Theseus, and died not long
 afterwards. 83 

 [3.6.1] Now Eteocles and Polynices made a compact with each other concerning the kingdom and
 resolved that each should rule alternately for a year at a time. 84 Some
 say that Polynices was the first to rule, and that after a year he handed over the kingdom to Eteocles; but some
 say that Eteocles was the first to rule, and would not hand over the kingdom. So, being banished from Thebes,
 Polynices came to Argos, taking with him the necklace and the robe. 85 The
 king of Argos was Adrastus, son of Talaus; and Polynices went up to his palace by night and engaged in a fight
 with Tydeus, son of Oeneus, who had fled from Calydon. 86 At the sudden
 outcry Adrastus appeared and parted them, and remembering the words of a certain seer who told him to yoke his
 daughters in marriage to a boar and a lion, 87 he accepted them both as
 bridegrooms, because they had on their shields, the one the forepart of a boar, and the other the forepart of a
 lion. 88 And Tydeus married Deipyle, and Polynices married Argia 89 ; and Adrastus promised that he would restore them both to their native
 lands. And first he was eager to march against Thebes, and he mustered the chiefs.

 [3.6.2] But Amphiaraus, son of Oicles, being a seer and foreseeing that all who joined in the expedition except
 Adrastus were destined to perish, shrank from it himself and discouraged the rest. However, Polynices went to
 Iphis, son of Alector, and begged to know how Amphiaraus could be compelled to go to the war. He answered that
 it could be done if Eriphyle got the necklace. 90 Now Amphiaraus had
 forbidden Eriphyle to accept gifts from Polynices; but Polynices gave her the necklace and begged her to
 persuade Amphiaraus to go to the war; for the decision lay with her, because once, when a difference arose
 between him and Adrastus, he had made it up with him and sworn to let Eriphyle decide any future dispute he
 might have with Adrastus. 91 Accordingly, when war was to be made on
 Thebes, and the measure was advocated by Adrastus and opposed by Amphiaraus, Eriphyle accepted the necklace and
 persuaded him to march with Adrastus. Thus forced to go to the war, Amphiaraus laid his commands on his sons,
 that, when they were grown up, they should slay their mother and march against Thebes.

 [3.6.3] Having mustered an army with seven leaders, Adrastus hastened to wage war on Thebes. The leaders were
 these 92 : Adrastus, son of Talaus; Amphiaraus, son of Oicles; Capaneus, son
 of Hipponous; Hippomedon, son of Aristomachus, but some say of Talaus. These came from Argos; but Polynices, son
 of Oedipus, came from Thebes; Tydeus, son of Oeneus, was an Aetolian; Parthenopaeus, son of Melanion, was an
 Arcadian. Some, however, do not reckon Tydeus and Polynices among them, but include Eteoclus, son of
 Iphis, 93 and Mecisteus 94 in the list
 of the seven.

 [3.6.4] Having come to Nemea, of which Lycurgus was king, they sought for water; and Hypsipyle showed them the
 way to a spring, leaving behind an infant boy Opheltes, whom she nursed, a child of Eurydice and
 Lycurgus. 95 For the Lemnian women, afterwards learning that Thoas had been
 saved alive, 96 put him to death and sold Hypsipyle into slavery; wherefore
 she served in the house of Lycurgus as a purchased bondwoman. But while she showed the spring, the abandoned boy
 was killed by a serpent. When Adrastus and his party appeared on the scene, they slew the serpent and buried the
 boy; but Amphiaraus told them that the sign foreboded the future, and they called the boy Archemorus. 97 They celebrated the Nemean games in his honor; and Adrastus won the horse
 race, Eteoclus the footrace, Tydeus the boxing match, Amphiaraus the leaping and quoit-throwing match, Laodocus
 the javelin-throwing match, Polynices the wrestling match, and Parthenopaeus the archery match.

 [3.6.5] When they came to Cithaeron, they sent Tydeus to tell Eteocles in advance that he must cede the kingdom
 to Polynices, as they had agreed among themselves. As Eteocles paid no heed to the message, Tydeus, by way of
 putting the Thebans to the proof, challenged them to single combat and was victorious in every encounter; and
 though the Thebans set fifty armed men to lie in wait for him as he went away, he slew them all but Maeon, and
 then came to the camp. 98 

 [3.6.6] Having armed themselves, the Argives approached the walls 99 ; and
 as there were seven gates, Adrastus was stationed at the Homoloidian gate, Capaneus at the Ogygian, Amphiaraus
 at the Proetidian, Hippomedon at the Oncaidian, Polynices at the Hypsistan, 100 Parthenopaeus at the Electran, and Tydeus at the Crenidian. 101 Eteocles on his side armed the Thebans, and having appointed leaders to
 match those of the enemy in number, he put the battle in array, and resorted to divination to learn how they
 might overcome the foe. 

 [3.6.7] Now there was among the Thebans a soothsayer, Tiresias, son of Everes and a nymph Chariclo, of the
 family of Udaeus, the Spartan, 102 and he had lost the sight of his eyes.
 Different stories are told about his blindness and his power of soothsaying. For some say that he was blinded by
 the gods because he revealed their secrets to men. But Pherecydes says that he was blinded by Athena 103 ; for Chariclo was dear to Athena . . . and Tiresias saw the goddess stark
 naked, and she covered his eyes with her hands, and so rendered him sightless. And when Chariclo asked her to
 restore his sight, she could not do so, but by cleansing his ears she caused him to understand every note of
 birds; and she gave him a staff of cornel-wood, 104 wherewith he walked
 like those who see. But Hesiod says that he beheld snakes copulating on Cyllene, and that having wounded them he
 was turned from a man into a woman, but that on observing the same snakes copulating again, he became a
 man. 105 Hence, when Hera and Zeus disputed whether the pleasures of love
 are felt more by women or by men, they referred to him for a decision. He said that if the pleasures of love be
 reckoned at ten, men enjoy one and women nine. Wherefore Hera blinded him, but Zeus bestowed on him the art of
 soothsaying. The saying of Tiresias to Zeus and Hera: "Of ten parts a man enjoys one only; but a woman
 enjoys the full ten parts in her heart." 106 He also lived to a
 great age.

 So when the Thebans sought counsel of him, he said that they should be victorious if Menoeceus, son of Creon,
 would offer himself freely as a sacrifice to Ares. On hearing that, Menoeceus, son of Creon, slew himself before
 the gates. 107 But a battle having taken place, the Cadmeans were chased
 in a crowd as far as the walls, and Capaneus, seizing a ladder, was climbing up it to the walls, when Zeus smote
 him with a thunderbolt. 108 

 [3.6.8] When that befell, the Argives turned to flee. And as many fell, Eteocles and Polynices, by the
 resolution of both armies, fought a single combat for the kingdom, and slew each other. 109 In another fierce battle the sons of Astacus did doughty deeds; for
 Ismarus slew Hippomedon, 110 Leades slew Eteoclus, and Amphidicus slew
 Parthenopaeus. But Euripides says that Parthenopaeus was slain by Periclymenus, son of Poseidon. 111 And Melanippus, the remaining one of the sons of Astacus, wounded Tydeus
 in the belly. As he lay half dead, Athena brought a medicine which she had begged of Zeus, and by which she
 intended to make him immortal. But Amphiaraus hated Tydeus for thwarting him by persuading the Argives to march
 to Thebes; so when he perceived the intention of the goddess he cut off the head of Melanippus and gave it to
 Tydeus, who, wounded though he was, had killed him. And Tydeus split open the head and gulped up the brains. But
 when Athena saw that, in disgust she grudged and withheld the intended benefit. 112 Amphiaraus fled beside the river Ismenus, and before Periclymenus could
 wound him in the back, Zeus cleft the earth by throwing a thunderbolt, and Amphiaraus vanished with his chariot
 and his charioteer Baton, or, as some say, Elato 113 ; and Zeus made him
 immortal. Adrastus alone was saved by his horse Arion. That horse Poseidon begot on Demeter, when in the
 likeness of a Fury she consorted with him. 114 

 [3.7.1] Having succeeded to the kingdom of Thebes, Creon cast out the Argive dead unburied,
 issued a proclamation that none should bury them, and set watchmen. But Antigone, one of the daughters of
 Oedipus, stole the body of Polynices, and secretly buried it, and having been detected by Creon himself, she was
 interred alive in the grave. 115 Adrastus fled to Athens 116 and took refuge at the altar of Mercy, 117 and laying on it the suppliant's bough 118 he prayed that they would bury the dead. And the Athenians marched with
 Theseus, captured Thebes, and gave the dead to their kinsfolk to bury. And when the pyre of Capaneus was
 burning, his wife Evadne, the daughter of Iphis, thew herself on the pyre, and was burned with him. 119 

 [3.7.2] Ten years afterwards the sons of the fallen, called the Epigoni, purposed to march against Thebes to
 avenge the death of their fathers 120 ; and when they consulted the oracle,
 the god predicted victory under the leadership of Alcmaeon. So Alcmaeon joined the expedition, though he was
 loath to lead the army till he had punished his mother; for Eriphyle had received the robe from Thersander, son
 of Polynices, and had persuaded her sons also 121 to go to the war. Having
 chosen Alcmaeon as their leader, they made war on Thebes. The men who took part in the expedition were these:
 Alcmaeon and Amphilochus, sons of Amphiaraus; Aegialeus, son of Adrastus; Diomedes, son of Tydeus; Promachus,
 son of Parthenopaeus; Sthenelus, son of Capaneus; Thersander, son of Polynices; and Euryalus, son of Mecisteus.

 [3.7.3] They first laid waste the surrounding villages; then, when the Thebans advanced against them, led by
 Laodamas, son of Eteocles, they fought bravely, 122 and though Laodamas
 killed Aegialeus, he was himself killed by Alcmaeon, 123 and after his
 death the Thebans fled in a body within the walls. But as Tiresias told them to send a herald to treat with the
 Argives, and themselves to take to flight, they did send a herald to the enemy, and, mounting their children and
 women on the wagons, themselves fled from the city. When they had come by night to the spring called Tilphussa,
 Tiresias drank of it and expired. 124 After travelling far the Thebans
 built the city of Hestiaea and took up their abode there.

 [3.7.4] But the Argives, on learning afterwards the flight of the Thebans, entered the city and collected the
 booty, and pulled down the walls. But they sent a portion of the booty to Apollo at Delphi and with it Manto,
 daughter of Tiresias; for they had vowed that, if they took Thebes, they would dedicate to him the fairest of
 the spoils. 125 

 [3.7.5] After the capture of Thebes, when Alcmaeon learned that his mother Eriphyle had been bribed to his
 undoing also, 126 he was more incensed than ever, and in accordance with
 an oracle given to him by Apollo he killed his mother. 127 Some say that
 he killed her in conjunction with his brother Amphilochus, others that he did it alone. But Alcmaeon was visited
 by the Fury of his mother's murder, and going mad he first repaired to Oicles 128 in Arcadia, and thence to Phegeus at Psophis. And having been purified by
 him he married Arsinoe, daughter of Phegeus, 129 and gave her the necklace
 and the robe. But afterwards the ground became barren on his account, 130 
 and the god bade him in an oracle to depart to Achelous and to stand another trial on the river bank. 131 At first he repaired to Oeneus at Calydon and was entertained by him;
 then he went to the Thesprotians, but was driven away from the country; and finally he went to the springs of
 Achelous, and was purified by him, 132 and received Callirrhoe, his
 daughter, to wife. Moreover he colonized the land which the Achelous had formed by its silt, and he took up his
 abode there. 133 But afterwards Callirrhoe coveted the necklace and robe,
 and said she would not live with him if she did not get them. So away Alcmaeon hied to Psophis and told Phegeus
 how it had been predicted that he should be rid of his madness when he had brought the necklace and the robe to
 Delphi and dedicated them. 134 Phegeus believed him and gave them to him.
 But a servant having let out that he was taking the things to Callirrhoe, Phegeus commanded his sons, and they
 lay in wait and killed him. 135 When Arsinoe upbraided them, the sons of
 Phegeus clapped her into a chest and carried her to Tegea and gave her as a slave to Agapenor, falsely accusing
 her of Alcmaeon's murder.

 [3.7.6] Being apprized of Alcmaeon's untimely end and courted by Zeus, Callirrhoe requested that the sons she
 had by Alcmaeon might be full grown in order to avenge their father's murder. And being suddenly full-grown, the
 sons went forth to right their father's wrong. 136 Now Pronous and Agenor,
 the sons of Phegeus, 137 carrying the necklace and robe to Delphi to
 dedicate them, turned in at the house of Agapenor at the same time as Amphoterus and Acarnan, the sons of
 Alcmaeon; and the sons of Alcmaeon killed their father's murderers, and going to Psophis and entering the palace
 they slew both Phegeus and his wife. They were pursued as far as Tegea, but saved by the intervention of the
 Tegeans and some Argives, and the Psophidians took to flight.

 [3.7.7] Having acquainted their mother with these things, they went to Delphi and dedicated the necklace and
 robe 138 according to the injunction of Achelous. Then they journeyed to
 Epirus, collected settlers, and colonized Acarnania. 139 

 But Euripides says 140 that in the time of his madness Alcmaeon begat two
 children, Amphilochus and a daughter Tisiphone, by Manto, daughter of Tiresias, and that he brought the babes to
 Corinth and gave them to Creon, king of Corinth, to bring up; and that on account of her extraordinary
 comeliness Tisiphone was sold as a slave by Creon's spouse, who feared that Creon might make her his wedded
 wife. But Alcmaeon bought her and kept her as a handmaid, not knowing that she was his daughter, and coming to
 Corinth to get back his children he recovered his son also. And Amphilochus colonized Amphilochian Argos in
 obedience to oracles of Apollo. 141 

 [3.8.1] Let us now return to Pelasgus, who, Acusilaus says, was a son of Zeus and Niobe, as we
 have supposed, 142 but Hesiod declares him to have been a son of the soil.
 He had a son Lycaon 143 by Meliboea, daughter of Ocean or, as others say,
 by a nymph Cyllene; and Lycaon, reigning over the Arcadians, begat by many wives fifty sons, to wit: Melaeneus,
 Thesprotus, Helix, Nyctimus, Peucetius, Caucon, Mecisteus, Hopleus, Macareus, Macednus, Horus, Polichus,
 Acontes, Evaemon, Ancyor, Archebates, Carteron, Aegaeon, Pallas, Eumon, Canethus, Prothous, Linus, Coretho,
 Maenalus, Teleboas, Physius, Phassus, Phthius, Lycius, Halipherus, Genetor, Bucolion, Socleus, Phineus, Eumetes,
 Harpaleus, Portheus, Plato, Haemo, Cynaethus, Leo, Harpalycus, Heraeeus, Titanas, Mantineus, Clitor, Stymphalus,
 Orchomenus, . . . These exceeded all men in pride and impiety; and Zeus, desirous of putting their impiety to
 the proof, came to them in the likeness of a day-laborer. They offered him hospitality and having slaughtered a
 male child of the natives, they mixed his bowels with the sacrifices, and set them before him, at the
 instigation of the elder brother Maenalus. 144 But Zeus in disgust upset
 the table at the place which is still called Trapezus, 145 and blasted
 Lycaon and his sons by thunderbolts, all but Nyctimus, the youngest; for Earth was quick enough to lay hold of
 the right hand of Zeus and so appease his wrath.

 [3.8.2] But when Nyctimus succeeded to the kingdom, there occurred the flood in the age of Deucalion 146 ; some said that it was occasioned by the impiety of Lycaon's sons.

 But Eumelus and some others say that Lycaon had also a daughter Callisto 147 ; though Hesiod says she was one of the nymphs, Asius that she was a
 daughter of Nycteus, and Pherecydes that she was a daughter of Ceteus. 148 
 She was a companion of Artemis in the chase, wore the same garb, and swore to her to remain a maid. Now Zeus
 loved her and, having assumed the likeness, as some say, of Artemis, or, as others say, of Apollo, he shared her
 bed against her will, and wishing to escape the notice of Hera, he turned her into a bear. But Hera persuaded
 Artemis to shoot her down as a wild beast. Some say, however, that Artemis shot her down because she did not
 keep her maidenhood. When Callisto perished, Zeus snatched the babe, named it Arcas, and gave it to Maia to
 bring up in Arcadia; and Callisto he turned into a star and called it the Bear.

 [3.9.1] Arcas had two sons, Elatus and Aphidas, by Leanira, daughter of Amyclas, or by
 Meganira, daughter of Croco, or, according to Eumelus, by a nymph Chrysopelia. 149 These divided the land between them, but Elatus had all the power, and he
 begat Stymphalus and Pereus by Laodice, daughter of Cinyras, and Aphidas had a son Aleus and a daughter
 Stheneboea, who was married to Proetus. And Aleus had a daughter Auge and two sons, Cepheus and Lycurgus, by
 Neaera, daughter of Pereus. Auge was seduced by Hercules 150 and hid her
 babe in the precinct of Athena, whose priesthood she held. But the land remaining barren, and the oracles
 declaring that there was impiety in the precinct of Athena, she was detected and delivered by her father to
 Nauplius to be put to death, and from him Teuthras, prince of Mysia, received and married her. But the babe,
 being exposed on Mount Parthenius, was suckled by a doe and hence called Telephus. Bred by the neatheards of
 Corythus, he went to Delphi in quest of his parents, and on information received from the god he repaired to
 Mysia and became an adopted son of Teuthras, on whose death he succeeded to the princedom.

 [3.9.2] Lycurgus had sons, Ancaeus, Epochus, Amphidamas, and Iasus, 151 
 by Cleophyle or Eurynome. And Amphidamas had a son Melanion and a daughter Antimache, whom Eurystheus married.
 And Iasus had a daughter Atalanta 152 by Clymene, daughter of Minyas. This
 Atalanta was exposed by her father, because he desired male children; and a she bear came often and gave her
 suck, till hunters found her and brought her up among themselves. Grown to womanhood, Atalanta kept herself a
 virgin, and hunting in the wilderness she remained always under arms. The centaurs Rhoecus and Hylaeus tried to
 force her, but were shot down and killed by her. She went moreover with the chiefs to hunt the Calydonian boar,
 and at the games held in honor of Pelias she wrestled with Peleus and won. Afterwards she discovered her
 parents, but when her father would have persuaded her to wed, she went away to a place that might serve as a
 racecourse, and, having planted a stake three cubits high in the middle of it, she caused her wooers to race
 before her from there, and ran herself in arms; and if the wooer was caught up, his due was death on the spot,
 and if he was not caught up, his due was marriage. When many had already perished, Melanion came to run for love
 of her, bringing golden apples from Aphrodite, 153 and being pursued he
 threw them down, and she, picking up the dropped fruit, was beaten in the race. So Melanion married her. And
 once on a time it is said that out hunting they entered into the precinct of Zeus, and there taking their fill
 of love were changed into lions. 154 But Hesiod and some others have said
 that Atalanta was not a daughter of Iasus, but of Schoeneus; and Euripides says that she was a daughter of
 Maenalus, and that her husband was not Melanion but Hippomenes. 155 And by
 Melanion, or Ares, Atalanta had a son Parthenopaeus, who went to the war against Thebes. 156 

 [3.10.1] Atlas and Pleione, daughter of Ocean, had seven daughters called the Pleiades, born
 to them at Cyllene in Arcadia, to wit: Alcyone, Merope, Celaeno, Electra, Sterope, Taygete, and Maia. 157 Of these, Sterope was married to Oenomaus, 158 and Merope to Sisyphus. And Poseidon had intercourse with two of them,
 first with Celaeno, by whom he had Lycus, whom Poseidon made to dwell in the Islands of the Blest, and second
 with Alcyone, who bore a daughter, Aethusa, the mother of Eleuther by Apollo, and two sons Hyrieus and
 Hyperenor. Hyrieus had Nycteus and Lycus by a nymph Clonia; and Nycteus had Antiope by Polyxo; and Antiope had
 Zethus and Amphion by Zeus. 159 And Zeus consorted with the other
 daughters of Atlas.

 [3.10.2] Maia, the eldest, as the fruit of her intercourse with Zeus, gave birth to Hermes in a cave of
 Cyllene. 160 He was laid in swaddling-bands on the winnowing fan, 161 but he slipped out and made his way to Pieria and stole the kine which
 Apollo was herding. 162 And lest he should be detected by the tracks, he
 put shoes on their feet and brought them to Pylus, and hid the rest in a cave; but two he sacrificed and nailed
 the skins to rocks, while of the flesh he boiled and ate some, 163 and
 some he burned. And quickly he departed to Cyllene. And before the cave he found a tortoise browsing. He cleaned
 it out, strung the shell with chords made from the kine he had sacrificed, and having thus produced a lyre he
 invented also a plectrum. 164 But Apollo came to Pylus 165 in search of the kine, and he questioned the inhabitants. They said that
 they had seen a boy driving cattle, but could not say whither they had been driven, because they could find no
 track. Having discovered the thief by divination, 166 Apollo came to Maia
 at Cyllene and accused Hermes. But she showed him the child in his swaddling-bands. So Apollo brought him to
 Zeus, and claimed the kine; and when Zeus bade him restore them, Hermes denied that he had them, but not being
 believed he led Apollo to Pylus and restored the kine. Howbeit, when Apollo heard the lyre, he gave the kine in
 exchange for it. And while Hermes pastured them, he again made himself a shepherd's pipe and piped on it. 167 And wishing to get the pipe also, Apollo offered to give him the golden
 wand which he owned while he herded cattle. 168 But Hermes wished both to
 get the wand for the pipe and to acquire the art of divination. So he gave the pipe and learned the art of
 divining by pebbles. 169 And Zeus appointed him herald to himself and to
 the infernal gods.

 [3.10.3] Taygete had by Zeus a son Lacedaemon, after whom the country of Lacedaemon is called. 170 Lacedaemon and Sparta, daughter of Eurotas (who was a son of
 Lelex, 171 a son of the soil, by a Naiad nymph Cleocharia), had a son
 Amyclas and a daughter Eurydice, whom Acrisius married. Amyclas and Diomede, daughter of Lapithus, had sons,
 Cynortes and Hyacinth. 172 They say that this Hyacinth was beloved of
 Apollo and killed by him involuntarily with the cast of a quoit. 173 
 Cynortes had a son Perieres, who married Gorgophone, daughter of Perseus, as Stesichorus says, and she bore
 Tyndareus, Icarius, Aphareus, and Leucippus. 174 Aphareus and Arene,
 daughter of Oebalus, had sons Lynceus and Idas and Pisus; but according to many, Idas is said to have been
 gotten by Poseidon. Lynceus excelled in sharpness of sight, so that he could even see things underground. 175 Leucippus had daughters, Hilaira and Phoebe: these the Dioscuri carried
 off and married. 176 Besides them Leucippus begat Arsinoe: with her Apollo
 had intercourse, and she bore Aesculapius. But some affirm that Aesculapius was not a son of Arsinoe, daughter
 of Leucippus, but that he was a son of Coronis, daughter of Phlegyas in Thessaly. 177 And they say that Apollo loved her and at once consorted with her, but
 that she, against her father's judgment, preferred and cohabited with Ischys, brother of Caeneus. Apollo cursed
 the raven that brought the tidings and made him black instead of white, as he had been before; but he killed
 Coronis. As she was burning, he snatched the babe from the pyre and brought it to Chiron, the centaur, 178 by whom he was brought up and taught the arts of healing and hunting. And
 having become a surgeon, and carried the art to a great pitch, he not only prevented some from dying, but even
 raised up the dead; for he had received from Athena the blood that flowed from the veins of the Gorgon, and
 while he used the blood that flowed from the veins on the left side for the bane of mankind, he used the blood
 that flowed from the right side for salvation, and by that means he raised the dead. 179 I found some who are reported to have been raised by him, 180 to wit, Capaneus and Lycurgus, 181 
 as Stesichorus says in the Eriphyle ; Hippolytus, 182 as the
 author of the Naupactica reports; Tyndareus, as Panyasis says 183 ; Hymenaeus, as the Orphics report; and Glaucus, son of Minos, 184 as Melesagoras relates.

 [3.10.4] But Zeus, fearing that men might acquire the healing art from him and so come to the rescue of each
 other, smote him with a thunderbolt. 185 Angry on that account, Apollo
 slew the Cyclopes who had fashioned the thunderbolt for Zeus. 186 But Zeus
 would have hurled him to Tartarus; however, at the intercession of Latona he ordered him to serve as a thrall to
 a man for a year. So he went to Admetus, son of Pheres, at Pherae, and served him as a herdsman, and caused all
 the cows to drop twins. 187 

 But some say that Aphareus and Leucippus were sons of Perieres, the son of Aeolus, and that Cynortes begat
 Perieres, and that Perieres begat Oebalus, and that Oebalus begat Tyndareus, Hippocoon, and Icarius by a Naiad
 nymph Batia. 188 

 [3.10.5] Now Hippocoon had sons, to wit: Dorycleus, Scaeus, Enarophorus, Eutiches, Bucolus, Lycaethus, Tebrus,
 Hippothous, Eurytus, Hippocorystes, Alcinus, and Alcon. With the help of these sons Hippocoon expelled Icarius
 and Tyndareus from Lacedaemon. 189 They fled to Thestius and allied
 themselves with him in the war which he waged with his neighbors; and Tyndareus married Leda, daughter of
 Thestius. But afterwards, when Hercules slew Hippocoon and his sons, 190 
 they returned, and Tyndareus succeeded to the kingdom.

 [3.10.6] Icarius and Periboea, a Naiad nymph, 191 had five sons, Thoas,
 Damasippus, Imeusimus, Aletes, Perileos, 192 and a daughter Penelope, whom
 Ulysses married. 193 Tyndareus and Leda had daughters, to wit, Timandra,
 whom Echemus married, 194 and Clytaemnestra, whom Agamemnon married; also
 another daughter Phylonoe, whom Artemis made immortal. 

 [3.10.7] But Zeus in the form of a swan consorted with Leda, and on the same night Tyndareus cohabited with
 her; and she bore Pollux and Helen to Zeus, and Castor and Clytaemnestra to Tyndareus. 195 But some say that Helen was a daughter of Nemesis and Zeus; for that she,
 flying from the arms of Zeus, changed herself into a goose, but Zeus in his turn took the likeness of a swan and
 so enjoyed her; and as the fruit of their loves she laid an egg, and a certain shepherd found it in the groves
 and brought and gave it to Leda; and she put it in a chest and kept it; and when Helen was hatched in due time,
 Leda brought her up as her own daughter. 196 And when she grew into a
 lovely woman, Theseus carried her off and brought her to Aphidnae. 197 But
 when Theseus was in Hades, Pollux and Castor marched against Aphidnae, took the city, got possession of Helen,
 and led Aethra, the mother of Theseus, away captive.

 [3.10.8] Now the kings of Greece repaired to Sparta to win the hand of Helen. The wooers were these 198 : -- Ulysses, son of Laertes; Diomedes, son of Tydeus; Antilochus, son of
 Nestor; Agapenor, son of Ancaeus; Sthenelus, son of Capaneus; Amphimachus, son of Cteatus; Thalpius, son of
 Eurytus; Meges, son of Phyleus; Amphilochus, son of Amphiaraus; Menestheus, son of Peteos; Schedius and
 Epistrophus, sons of Iphitus; Polyxenus, son of Agasthenes; Peneleos, son of Hippalcimus; Leitus, son of
 Alector; Ajax, son of Oileus; Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of Ares; Elephenor, son of Chalcodon; Eumelus, son
 of Admetus; Polypoetes, son of Perithous; Leonteus, son of Coronus; Podalirius and Machaon, sons of Aesculapius;
 Philoctetes, son of Poeas; Eurypylus, son of Evaemon; Protesilaus, son of Iphiclus; Menelaus, son of Atreus;
 Ajax and Teucer, sons of Telamon; Patroclus, son of Menoetius.

 [3.10.9] Seeing the multitude of them, Tyndareus feared that the preference of one might set the others
 quarrelling; but Ulysses promised that, if he would help him to win the hand of Penelope, he would suggest a way
 by which there would be no quarrel. And when Tyndareus promised to help him, Ulysses told him to exact an oath
 from all the suitors that they would defend the favoured bridegroom against any wrong that might be done him in
 respect of his marriage. On hearing that, Tyndareus put the suitors on their oath, 199 and while he chose Menelaus to be the bridegroom of Helen, he solicited
 Icarius to bestow Penelope on Ulysses. 

 [3.11.1] Now Menelaus had by Helen a daughter Hermione and, according to some, a son
 Nicostratus 200 ; and by a female slave Pieris, an Aetolian, or, according
 to Acusilaus, by Tereis, he had a son Megapenthes 201 ; and by a nymph
 Cnossia, according to Eumelus, he had a son Xenodamus.

 [3.11.2] Of the sons born to Leda Castor practised the art of war, and Pollux the art of boxing 202 ; and on account of their manliness they were both called Dioscuri. 203 And wishing to marry the daughters of Leucippus, they carried them off
 from Messene and wedded them 204 ; and Pollux had Mnesileus by Phoebe, and
 Castor had Anogon by Hilaira. And having driven booty of cattle from Arcadia, in company with Idas and Lynceus,
 sons of Aphareus, they allowed Idas to divide the spoil. He cut a cow in four and said that one half of the
 booty should be his who ate his share first, and that the rest should be his who ate his share second. And
 before they knew where they were, Idas had swallowed his own share first and likewise his brother's, and with
 him had driven off the captured cattle to Messene. But the Dioscuri marched against Messene, and drove away that
 cattle and much else besides. And they lay in wait for Idas and Lynceus. But Lynceus spied Castor and discovered
 him to Idas, who killed him. Pollux chased them and slew Lynceus by throwing his spear, but in pursuing Lynceus
 he was wounded in the head with a stone thrown by him, and fell down in a swoon. And Zeus smote Idas with a
 thunderbolt, but Pollux he carried up to heaven. Nevertheless, as Pollux refused to accept immortality while his
 brother Castor was dead, Zeus permitted them both to be every other day among the gods and among mortals. 205 And when the Dioscuri were translated to the gods, Tyndareus sent for
 Menelaus to Sparta and handed over the kingdom to him.

 [3.12.1] Electra, daughter of Atlas, had two sons, Iasion and Dardanus, by Zeus. 206 Now Iasion loved Demeter, and in an attempt to defile the goddess he was
 killed by a thunderbolt. 207 Grieved at his brother's death, Dardanus left
 Samothrace and came to the opposite mainland. That country was ruled by a king, Teucer, son of the river
 Scamander and of a nymph Idaea, and the inhabitants of the country were called Teucrians after Teucer. Being
 welcomed by the king, and having received a share of the land and the king's daughter Batia, he built a city
 Dardanus, and when Teucer died he called the whole country Dardania. 208 

 [3.12.2] And he had sons born to him, Ilus and Erichthonius, of whom Ilus died childless, 209 and Erichthonius succeeded to the kingdom and marrying Astyoche, daughter
 of Simoeis, begat Tros. 210 On succeeding to the kingdom, Tros called the
 country Troy after himself, and marrying Callirrhoe, daughter of Scamander, he begat a daughter Cleopatra, and
 sons, Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymede. 211 This Ganymede, for the sake of
 his beauty, Zeus caught up on an eagle and appointed him cupbearer of the gods in heaven 212 ; and Assaracus had by his wife Hieromneme, daughter of Simoeis, a son
 Capys; and Capys had by his wife Themiste, daughter of Ilus, a son Anchises, whom Aphrodite met in love's
 dalliance, and to whom she bore Aeneas 213 and Lyrus, who died childless.

 [3.12.3] But Ilus went to Phrygia, and finding games held there by the king, he was victorious in wrestling. As
 a prize he received fifty youths and as many maidens, and the king, in obedience to an oracle, gave him also a
 dappled cow and bade him found a city wherever the animal should lie down; so he followed the cow. And when she
 was come to what was called the hill of the Phrygian Ate, she lay down; there Ilus built a city and called it
 Ilium. 214 And having prayed to Zeus that a sign might be shown to him, he
 beheld by day the Palladium, fallen from heaven, lying before his tent. It was three cubits in height, its feet
 joined together; in its right hand it held a spear aloft, and in the other hand a distaff and spindle. 215 

 The story told about the Palladium is as follows 216 : They say that when
 Athena was born she was brought up by Triton, 217 who had a daughter
 Pallas; and that both girls practised the arts of war, but that once on a time they fell out; and when Pallas
 was about to strike a blow, Zeus in fear interposed the aegis, and Pallas, being startled, looked up, and so
 fell wounded by Athena. And being exceedingly grieved for her, Athena made a wooden image in her likeness, and
 wrapped the aegis, which she had feared, about the breast of it, and set it up beside Zeus and honored it. But
 afterwards Electra, at the time of her violation, 218 took refuge at the
 image, and Zeus threw the Palladium along with Ate 219 into the Ilian
 country; and Ilus built a temple for it, and honored it. Such is the legend of the Palladium. 

 And Ilus married Eurydice, daughter of Adrastus, and begat Laomedon, 220 
 who married Strymo, daughter of Scamander; but according to some his wife was Placia, daughter of Otreus, and
 according to others she was Leucippe; and he begat five sons, Tithonus, Lampus, Clytius, Hicetaon,
 Podarces, 221 and three daughters, Hesione, Cilla, and Astyoche; and by a
 nymph Calybe he had a son Bucolion. 222 

 [3.12.4] Now the Dawn snatched away Tithonus for love and brought him to Ethiopia, and there consorting with
 him she bore two sons, Emathion and Memnon. 223 

 [3.12.5] But after that Ilium was captured by Hercules, as we have related a little before, 224 Podarces, who was called Priam, came to the throne, and he married first
 Arisbe, daughter of Merops, by whom he had a son Aesacus, who married Asterope, daughter of Cebren, and when she
 died he mourned for her and was turned into a bird. 225 But Priam handed
 over Arisbe to Hyrtacus and married a second wife Hecuba, daughter of Dymas, or, as some say, of Cisseus, or, as
 others say, of the river Sangarius and Metope. 226 The first son born to
 her was Hector; and when a second babe was about to be born Hecuba dreamed she had brought forth a firebrand,
 and that the fire spread over the whole city and burned it. 227 When Priam
 learned of the dream from Hecuba, he sent for his son Aesacus, for he was an interpreter of dreams, having been
 taught by his mother's father Merops. He declared that the child was begotten to be the ruin of his country and
 advised that the babe should be exposed. When the babe was born Priam gave it to a servant to take and expose on
 Ida; now the servant was named Agelaus. Exposed by him, the infant was nursed for five days by a bear; and, when
 he found it safe, he took it up, carried it away, brought it up as his own son on his farm, and named him Paris.
 When he grew to be a young man, Paris excelled many in beauty and strength, and was afterwards surnamed
 Alexander, because he repelled robbers and defended the flocks. 228 And
 not long afterwards he discovered his parents.

 After him Hecuba gave birth to daughters, Creusa, Laodice, 229 Polyxena,
 and Cassandra. Wishing to gain Cassandra's favours, Apollo promised to teach her the art of prophecy; she
 learned the art but refused her favours; hence Apollo deprived her prophecy of power to persuade. 230 Afterwards Hecuba bore sons, 231 
 Deiphobus, Helenus, Pammon, Polites, Antiphus, Hipponous, Polydorus, and Troilus: this last she is said to have
 had by Apollo.

 By other women Priam had sons, to wit, Melanippus, Gorgythion, Philaemon, Hippothous, Glaucus, Agathon,
 Chersidamas, Evagoras, Hippodamas, Mestor, Atas, Doryclus, Lycaon, Dryops, Bias, Chromius, Astygonus, Telestas,
 Evander, Cebriones, Mylius, Archemachus, Laodocus, Echephron, Idomeneus, Hyperion, Ascanius, Democoon, Aretus,
 Deiopites, Clonius, Echemmon, Hypirochus, Aegeoneus, Lysithous, Polymedon; and daughters, to wit, Medusa,
 Medesicaste, Lysimache, and Aristodeme.

 [3.12.6] Now Hector married Andromache, daughter of Eetion, 232 and
 Alexander married Oenone, daughter of the river Cebren. 233 She had
 learned from Rhea the art of prophecy, and warned Alexander not to sail to fetch Helen; but failing to persuade
 him, she told him to come to her if he were wounded, for she alone could heal him. When he had carried off Helen
 from Sparta and Troy was besieged, he was shot by Philoctetes with the bow of Hercules, and went back to Oenone
 on Ida. But she, nursing her grievance, refused to heal him. So Alexander was carried to Troy and died. But
 Oenone repented her, and brought the healing drugs; and finding him dead she hanged herself.

 The Asopus river was a son of Ocean and Tethys, or, as Acusilaus says, of Pero and Poseidon, or, according to
 some, of Zeus and Eurynome. Him Metope, herself a daughter of the river Ladon, married and bore two sons,
 Ismenus and Pelagon, and twenty daughters, of whom one, Aegina, was carried off by Zeus. 234 In search of her Asopus came to Corinth, and learned from Sisyphus that
 the ravisher was Zeus. 235 Asopus pursued him, but Zeus, by hurling
 thunderbolts, sent him away back to his own streams 236 ; hence coals are
 fetched to this day from the streams of that river. 237 And having
 conveyed Aegina to the island then named Oenone, but now called Aegina after her, Zeus cohabited with her and
 begot a son Aeacus on her. 238 As Aeacus was alone in the island, Zeus
 made the ants into men for him. 239 And Aeacus married Endeis, daughter of
 Sciron, by whom he had two sons, Peleus and Telamon. 240 But Pherecydes
 says that Telamon was a friend, not a brother of Peleus, he being a son of Actaeus and Glauce, daughter of
 Cychreus. 241 Afterwards Aeacus cohabited with Psamathe, daughter of
 Nereus, who turned herself into a seal to avoid his embraces, and he begot a son Phocus. 242 

 Now Aeacus was the most pious of men. Therefore, when Greece suffered from infertility on account of Pelops,
 because in a war with Stymphalus, king of the Arcadians, being unable to conquer Arcadia, he slew the king under
 a pretence of friendship, and scattered his mangled limbs, oracles of the gods declared that Greece would be rid
 of its present calamities if Aeacus would offer prayers on its behalf. So Aeacus did offer prayers, and Greece
 was delivered from the dearth. 243 Even after his death Aeacus is honored
 in the abode of Pluto, and keeps the keys of Hades. 244 

 As Phocus excelled in athletic sports, his brothers Peleus and Telamon plotted against him, and the lot falling
 on Telamon, he killed his brother in a match by throwing a quoit at his head, and with the help of Peleus
 carried the body and hid it in a wood. But the murder being detected, the two were driven fugitives from Aegina
 by Aeacus. 245 

 [3.12.7] And Telamon betook himself to Salamis, to the court of Cychreus, son of Poseidon and Salamis, daughter
 of Asopus. This Cychreus became king of Salamis through killing a snake which ravaged the island, and dying
 childless he bequeathed the kingdom to Telamon. 246 And Telamon married
 Periboea, daughter of Alcathus, 247 son of Pelops, and called his son
 Ajax, because when Hercules had prayed that he might have a male child, an eagle appeared after the
 prayer. 248 And having gone with Hercules on his expedition against Troy,
 he received as a prize Hesione, daughter of Laomedon, by whom he had a son Teucer. 249 

 [3.13.1] Peleus fled to Phthia to the court of Eurytion, son of Actor, and was purified by
 him, and he received from him his daughter Antigone and the third part of the country. 250 And a daughter Polydora was born to him, who was wedded by Borus, son of
 Perieres. 251 

 [3.13.2] Thence he went with Eurytion to hunt the Calydonian boar, but in throwing a dart at the hog he
 involuntarily struck and killed Eurytion. Therefore flying again from Phthia he betook him to Acastus at Iolcus
 and was purified by him. 252 

 [3.13.3] And at the games celebrated in honor of Pelias he contended in wrestling with Atalanta. 253 And Astydamia, wife of Acastus, fell in love with Peleus, and sent him a
 proposal for a meeting 254 ; and when she could not prevail on him she sent
 word to his wife that Peleus was about to marry Sterope, daughter of Acastus; on hearing which the wife of
 Peleus strung herself up. And the wife of Acastus falsely accused Peleus to her husband, alleging that he had
 attempted her virtue. On hearing that, Acastus would not kill the man whom he had purified, but took him to hunt
 on Pelion. There a contest taking place in regard to the hunt, Peleus cut out and put in his pouch the tongues
 of the animals that fell to him, while the party of Acastus bagged his game and derided him as if he had taken
 nothing. But he produced them the tongues, and said that he had taken just as many animals as he had
 tongues. 255 When he had fallen asleep on Pelion, Acastus deserted him,
 and hiding his sword in the cows' dung, returned. On arising and looking for his sword, Peleus was caught by the
 centaurs and would have perished, if he had not been saved by Chiron, who also restored him his sword, which he
 had sought and found.

 [3.13.4] Peleus married Polydora, daughter of Perieres, by whom he had a putative son Menesthius, though in
 fact Menesthius was the son of the river Sperchius. 256 

 [3.13.5] Afterwards he married Thetis, daughter of Nereus, 257 for whose
 hand Zeus and Poseidon had been rivals; but when Themis prophesied that the son born of Thetis would be mightier
 than his father, they withdrew. 258 But some say that when Zeus was bent
 on gratifying his passion for her, Prometheus declared that the son borne to him by her would be lord of
 heaven 259 ; and others affirm that Thetis would not consort with Zeus
 because she had been brought up by Hera, and that Zeus in anger would marry her to a mortal. 260 Chiron, therefore, having advised Peleus to seize her and hold her fast
 in spite of her shape-shifting, he watched his chance and carried her off, and though she turned, now into fire,
 now into water, and now into a beast, he did not let her go till he saw that she had resumed her former
 shape. 261 And he married her on Pelion, and there the gods celebrated the
 marriage with feast and song. 262 And Chiron gave Peleus an ashen
 spear, 263 and Poseidon gave him horses, Balius and Xanthus, and these
 were immortal. 264 

 [3.13.6] When Thetis had got a babe by Peleus, she wished to make it immortal, and unknown to Peleus she used
 to hide it in the fire by night in order to destroy the mortal element which the child inherited from its
 father, but by day she anointed him with ambrosia. 265 But Peleus watched
 her, and, seeing the child writhing on the fire, he cried out; and Thetis, thus prevented from accomplishing her
 purpose, forsook her infant son and departed to the Nereids. 266 Peleus
 brought the child to Chiron, who received him and fed him on the inwards of lions and wild swine and the marrows
 of bears, 267 and named him Achilles, because he had not put his lips to
 the breast 268 ; but before that time his name was Ligyron.

 [3.13.7] After that Peleus, with Jason and the Dioscuri, laid waste Iolcus; and he slaughtered Astydamia, wife
 of Acastus, and, having divided her limb from limb, he led the army through her into the city. 269 

 [3.13.8] When Achilles was nine years old, Calchas declared that Troy could not be taken without him; so
 Thetis, foreseeing that it was fated he should perish if he went to the war, disguised him in female garb and
 entrusted him as a maiden to Lycomedes. 270 Bred at his court, Achilles
 had an intrigue with Deidamia, daughter of Lycomedes, and a son Pyrrhus was born to him, who was afterwards
 called Neoptolemus. But the secret of Achilles was betrayed, and Ulysses, seeking him at the court of Lycomedes,
 discovered him by the blast of a trumpet. 271 And in that way Achilles
 went to Troy.

 He was accompanied by Phoenix, son of Amyntor. This Phoenix had been blinded by his father on the strength of a
 false accusation of seduction preferred against him by his father's concubine Phthia. But Peleus brought him to
 Chiron, who restored his sight, and thereupon Peleus made him king of the Dolopians. 272 

 Achilles was also accompanied by Patroclus, son of Menoetius 273 and
 Sthenele, daughter of Acastus; or the mother of Patroclus was Periopis, daughter of Pheres, or, as Philocrates
 says, she was Polymele, daughter of Peleus. At Opus, in a quarrel over a game of dice, Patroclus killed the boy
 Clitonymus, son of Amphidamas, and flying with his father he dwelt at the house of Peleus 274 and became a minion of Achilles. . . . 

 [3.14.1] Cecrops, a son of the soil, with a body compounded of man and serpent, was the first
 king of Attica, and the country which was formerly called Acte he named Cecropia after himself. 275 In his time, they say, the gods resolved to take possession of cities in
 which each of them should receive his own peculiar worship. So Poseidon was the first that came to Attica, and
 with a blow of his trident on the middle of the acropolis, he produced a sea which they now call
 Erechtheis. 276 After him came Athena, and, having called on Cecrops to
 witness her act of taking possession, she planted an olive tree, which is still shown in the Pandrosium. 277 But when the two strove for possession of the country, Zeus parted them
 and appointed arbiters, not, as some have affirmed, Cecrops and Cranaus, nor yet Erysichthon, but the twelve
 gods. 278 And in accordance with their verdict the country was adjudged to
 Athena, because Cecrops bore witness that she had been the first to plant the olive. Athena, therefore, called
 the city Athens after herself, and Poseidon in hot anger flooded the Thriasian plain and laid Attica under the
 sea. 279 

 [3.14.2] Cecrops married Agraulus, daughter of Actaeus, and had a son Erysichthon, who departed this life
 childless; and Cecrops had daughters, Agraulus, Herse, and Pandrosus. 280 
 Agraulus had a daughter Alcippe by Ares. In attempting to violate Alcippe, Halirrhothius, son of Poseidon and a
 nymph Euryte, was detected and killed by Ares. 281 Impeached by Poseidon,
 Ares was tried in the Areopagus before the twelve gods, and was acquitted. 282 

 [3.14.3] Herse had by Hermes a son Cephalus, whom Dawn loved and carried off, 283 and consorting with him in Syria bore a son Tithonus, who had a son
 Phaethon, 284 who had a son Astynous, who had a son Sandocus, who passed
 from Syria to Cilicia and founded a city Celenderis, and having married Pharnace, daughter of Megassares, king
 of Hyria, begat Cinyras. 285 This Cinyras in Cyprus, whither he had come
 with some people, founded Paphos; and having there married Metharme, daughter of Pygmalion, king of Cyprus, he
 begat Oxyporus and Adonis, 286 and besides them daughters, Orsedice,
 Laogore, and Braesia. These by reason of the wrath of Aphrodite cohabited with foreigners, and ended their life
 in Egypt.

 [3.14.4] And Adonis, while still a boy, was wounded and killed in hunting by a boar through the anger of
 Artemis. 287 Hesiod, however, affirms that he was a son of Phoenix and
 Alphesiboea; and Panyasis says that he was a son of Thias, king of Assyria, 288 who had a daughter Smyrna. In consequence of the wrath of Aphrodite, for
 she did not honor the goddess, this Smyrna conceived a passion for her father, and with the complicity of her
 nurse she shared her father's bed without his knowledge for twelve nights. But when he was aware of it, he drew
 his sword and pursued her, and being overtaken she prayed to the gods that she might be invisible; so the gods
 in compassion turned her into the tree which they call smyrna (myrrh). 289 Ten months afterwards the tree burst and Adonis, as he is called, was
 born, whom for the sake of his beauty, while he was still an infant, Aphrodite hid in a chest unknown to the
 gods and entrusted to Persephone. But when Persephone beheld him, she would not give him back. The case being
 tried before Zeus, the year was divided into three parts, and the god ordained that Adonis should stay by
 himself for one part of the year, with Persephone for one part, and with Aphrodite for the remainder. 290 However Adonis made over to Aphrodite his own share in addition; but
 afterwards in hunting he was gored and killed by a boar.

 [3.14.5] When Cecrops died, Cranaus came to the throne 291 ; he was a son
 of the soil, and it was in his time that the flood in the age of Deucalion is said to have taken place. 292 He married a Lacedaemonian wife, Pedias, daughter of Mynes, and begat
 Cranae, Menaechme, and Atthis; and when Atthis died a maid, Cranaus called the country Atthis. 293 

 [3.14.6] Cranaus was expelled by Amphictyon, 294 who reigned in his
 stead; some say that Amphictyon was a son of Deucalion, others that he was a son of the soil; and when he had
 reigned twelve years he was expelled by Erichthonius. 295 Some say that
 this Erichthonius was a son of Hephaestus and Atthis, daughter of Cranaus, and some that he was a son of
 Hephaestus and Athena, as follows: Athena came to Hephaestus, desirous of fashioning arms. But he, being
 forsaken by Aphrodite, fell in love with Athena, and began to pursue her; but she fled. When he got near her
 with much ado (for he was lame), he attempted to embrace her; but she, being a chaste virgin, would not submit
 to him, and he dropped his seed on the leg of the goddess. In disgust, she wiped off the seed with wool and
 threw it on the ground; and as she fled and the seed fell on the ground, Erichthonius was produced. 296 Him Athena brought up unknown to the other gods, wishing to make him
 immortal; and having put him in a chest, she committed it to Pandrosus, daughter of Cecrops, forbidding her to
 open the chest. But the sisters of Pandrosus opened it out of curiosity, and beheld a serpent coiled about the
 babe; and, as some say, they were destroyed by the serpent, but according to others they were driven mad by
 reason of the anger of Athena and threw themselves down from the acropolis. 297 Having been brought up by Athena herself in the precinct, 298 Erichthonius expelled Amphictyon and became king of Athens; and he set up
 the wooden image of Athena in the acropolis, 299 and instituted the
 festival of the Panathenaea, 300 and married Praxithea, a Naiad nymph, by
 whom he had a son Pandion.

 [3.14.7] When Erichthonius died and was buried in the same precinct of Athena, 301 Pandion 302 became king, in whose
 time Demeter and Dionysus came to Attica. 303 But Demeter was welcomed by
 Celeus at Eleusis, 304 and Dionysus by Icarius, who received from him a
 branch of a vine and learned the process of making wine. And wishing to bestow the god's boons on men, Icarius
 went to some shepherds, who, having tasted the beverage and quaffed it copiously without water for the pleasure
 of it, imagined that they were bewitched and killed him; but by day 305 
 they understood how it was and buried him. When his daughter Erigone was searching for her father, a domestic
 dog, named Maera, which had attended Icarius, discovered his dead body to her, and she bewailed her father and
 hanged herself. 306 

 [3.14.8] Pandion married Zeuxippe, his mother's sister, 307 and begat two
 daughters, Procne and Philomela, and twin sons, Erechtheus and Butes. But war having broken out with Labdacus on
 a question of boundaries, he called in the help of Tereus, son of Ares, from Thrace, and having with his help
 brought the war to a successful close, he gave Tereus his own daughter Procne in marriage. 308 Tereus had by her a son Itys, and having fallen in love with Philomela,
 he seduced her also saying that Procne was dead, for he concealed her in the country. Afterwards he married
 Philomela and bedded with her, and cut out her tongue. But by weaving characters in a robe she revealed thereby
 to Procne her own sorrows. And having sought out her sister, Procne killed her son Itys, boiled him, served him
 up for supper to the unwitting Tereus, and fled with her sister in haste. When Tereus was aware of what had
 happened, he snatched up an axe and pursued them. And being overtaken at Daulia in Phocis, they prayed the gods
 to be turned into birds, and Procne became a nightingale, and Philomela a swallow. And Tereus also was changed
 into a bird and became a hoopoe.

 [3.15.1] When Pandion died, his sons divided their father's inheritance between them, and
 Erechtheus got the kingdom, 309 and Butes got the priesthood of Athena and
 Poseidon Erechtheus. 310 Erechtheus married Praxithea, daughter of
 Phrasimus by Diogenia, daughter of Cephisus, and had sons, to wit, Cecrops, Pandorus, and Metion; and daughters,
 to wit, Procris, Creusa, Chthonia, and Orithyia, who was carried off by Boreas. 311 

 Chthonia was married to Butes, 312 Creusa to Xuthus, 313 and Procris to Cephalus, son of Deion. 314 Bribed by a golden crown, Procris admitted Pteleon to her bed, and being
 detected by Cephalus she fled to Minos. But he fell in love with her and tried to seduce her. Now if any woman
 had intercourse with Minos, it was impossible for her to escape with life; for because Minos cohabited with many
 women, Pasiphae bewitched him, and whenever he took another woman to his bed, he discharged wild beasts at her
 joints, and so the women perished. 315 But Minos had a swift dog and a
 dart that flew straight; and in return for these gifts Procris shared his bed, having first given him the
 Circaean root to drink that he might not harm her. But afterwards, fearing the wife of Minos, she came to Athens
 and being reconciled to Cephalus she went forth with him to the chase; for she was fond of hunting. As she was
 in pursuit of game in the thicket, Cephalus, not knowing she was there, threw a dart, hit and killed Procris,
 and, being tried in the Areopagus, was condemned to perpetual banishment. 316 

 [3.15.2] While Orithyia was playing by the Ilissus river, Boreas carried her off and had intercourse with her;
 and she bore daughters, Cleopatra and Chione, and winged sons, Zetes and Calais. These sons sailed with
 Jason 317 and met their end in chasing the Harpies; but according to
 Acusilaus, they were killed by Hercules in Tenos. 318 

 [3.15.3] Cleopatra was married to Phineus, who had by her two sons, Plexippus and Pandion. When he had these
 sons by Cleopatra, he married Idaea, daughter of Dardanus. She falsely accused her stepsons to Phineus of
 corrupting her virtue, and Phineus, believing her, blinded them both. 319 
 But when the Argonauts sailed past with Boreas, they punished him. 320 

 [3.15.4] Chione had connexion with Poseidon, and having given birth to Eumolpus 321 unknown to her father, in order not to be detected, she flung the child
 into the deep. But Poseidon picked him up and conveyed him to Ethiopia, and gave him to Benthesicyme (a daughter
 of his own by Amphitrite) to bring up. When he was full grown, Benthesicyme's husband gave him one of his two
 daughters. But he tried to force his wife's sister, and being banished on that account, he went with his son
 Ismarus to Tegyrius, king of Thrace, who gave his daughter in marriage to Eumolpus's son. But being afterwards
 detected in a plot against Tegyrius, he fled to the Eleusinians and made friends with them. Later, on the death
 of Ismarus, he was sent for by Tegyrius and went, composed his old feud with him, and succeeded to the kingdom.
 And war having broken out between the Athenians and the Eleusinians, he was called in by the Eleusinians and
 fought on their side with a large force of Thracians. 322 When Erechtheus
 inquired of the oracle how the Athenians might be victorious, the god answered that they would win the war if he
 would slaughter one of his daughters; and when he slaughtered his youngest, the others also slaughtered
 themselves; for, as some said, they had taken an oath among themselves to perish together. 323 In the battle which took place after the slaughter, Erechtheus killed
 Eumolpus.

 [3.15.5] But Poseidon having destroyed Erechtheus 324 and his house,
 Cecrops, the eldest of the sons of Erechtheus, succeeded to the throne. 325 He married Metiadusa, daughter of Eupalamus, and begat Pandion. This
 Pandion, reigning after Cecrops, was expelled by the sons of Metion in a sedition, and going to Pylas at Megara
 married his daughter Pylia. 326 And at a later time he was even appointed
 king of the city; for Pylas slew his father's brother Bias and gave the kingdom to Pandion, while he himself
 repaired to Peloponnese with a body of people and founded the city of Pylus. 327 

 While Pandion was at Megara, he had sons born to him, to wit, Aegeus, Pallas, Nisus, and Lycus. But some say
 that Aegeus was a son of Scyrius, but was passed off by Pandion as his own. 328 

 [3.15.6] After the death of Pandion his sons marched against Athens, expelled the Metionids, and divided the
 government in four; but Aegeus had the whole power. 329 The first wife
 whom he married was Meta, daughter of Hoples, and the second was Chalciope, daughter of Rhexenor. 330 As no child was born to him, he feared his brothers, and went to Pythia
 and consulted the oracle concerning the begetting of children. The god answered him: 

 The bulging mouth of the wineskin, O best of men, loose not until thou hast reached the height of
 Athens. 331 

 Not knowing what to make of the oracle, he set out on his return to Athens.

 [3.15.7] And journeying by way of Troezen, he lodged with Pittheus, son of Pelops, who, understanding the
 oracle, made him drunk and caused him to lie with his daughter Aethra. But in the same night Poseidon also had
 connexion with her. Now Aegeus charged Aethra that, if she gave birth to a male child, she should rear it,
 without telling whose it was; and he left a sword and sandals under a certain rock, saying that when the boy
 could roll away the rock and take them up, she was then to send him away with them. 

 But he himself came to Athens and celebrated the games of the Panathenian festival, in which Androgeus, son of
 Minos, vanquished all comers. Him Aegeus sent against the bull of Marathon, by which he was destroyed. But some
 say that as he journeyed to Thebes to take part in the games in honor of Laius, he was waylaid and murdered by
 the jealous competitors. 332 But when the tidings of his death were
 brought to Minos, as he was sacrificing to the Graces in Paros, he threw away the garland from his head and
 stopped the music of the flute, but nevertheless completed the sacrifice; hence down to this day they sacrifice
 to the Graces in Paros without flutes and garlands.

 [3.15.8] But not long afterwards, being master of the sea, he attacked Athens with a fleet and captured Megara,
 then ruled by king Nisus, son of Pandion, and he slew Megareus, son of Hippomenes, who had come from Onchestus
 to the help of Nisus. 333 Now Nisus perished through his daughter's
 treachery. For he had a purple hair on the middle of his head, and an oracle ran that when it was pulled out he
 should die; and his daughter Scylla fell in love with Minos and pulled out the hair. But when Minos had made
 himself master of Megara, he tied the damsel by the feet to the stern of the ship and drowned her. 334 

 When the war lingered on and he could not take Athens, he prayed to Zeus that he might be avenged on the
 Athenians. And the city being visited with a famine and a pestilence, the Athenians at first, in obedience to an
 ancient oracle, slaughtered the daughters of Hyacinth, to wit, Antheis, Aegleis, Lytaea, and Orthaea, on the
 grave of Geraestus, the Cyclops; now Hyacinth, the father of the damsels, had come from Lacedaemon and dwelt in
 Athens. 335 But when this was of no avail, they inquired of the oracle how
 they could be delivered; and the god answered them that they should give Minos whatever satisfaction he might
 choose. So they sent to Minos and left it to him to claim satisfaction. And Minos ordered them to send seven
 youths and the same number of damsels without weapons to be fodder for the Minotaur. 336 Now the Minotaur was confined in a labyrinth, in which he who entered
 could not find his way out; for many a winding turn shut off the secret outward way. 337 The labyrinth was constructed by Daedalus, whose father was Eupalamus,
 son of Metion, and whose mother was Alcippe 338 ; for he was an excellent
 architect and the first inventor of images. He had fled from Athens, because he had thrown down from the
 acropolis Talos, the son of his sister Perdix 339 ; for Talos was his
 pupil, and Daedalus feared that with his talents he might surpass himself, seeing that he had sawed a thin stick
 with a jawbone of a snake which he had found. 340 But the corpse was
 discovered; Daedalus was tried in the Areopagus, and being condemned fled to Minos. And there Pasiphae having
 fallen in love with the bull of Poseidon, Daedalus acted as her accomplice by contriving a wooden cow, and he
 constructed the labyrinth, to which the Athenians every year sent seven youths and as many damsels to be fodder
 for the Minotaur.

 [3.16.1] Aethra bore to Aegeus a son Theseus, and when he was grown up, he pushed away the
 rock and took up the sandals and the sword, 341 and hastened on foot to
 Athens. And he cleared 342 the road, which had been beset by evildoers.
 For first in Epidaurus he slew Periphetes, son of Hephaestus and Anticlia, who was surnamed the Clubman from the
 club which he carried. For being crazy on his legs he carried an iron club, with which he despatched the
 passers-by. That club Theseus wrested from him and continued to carry about. 343 

 [3.16.2] Second, he killed Sinis, son of Polypemon and Sylea, daughter of Corinthus. This Sinis was surnamed
 the Pine-bender; for inhabiting the Isthmus of Corinth he used to force the passersby to keep bending pine
 trees; but they were too weak to do so, and being tossed up by the trees they perished miserably. In that way
 also Theseus killed Sinis. 344 

 SEARCH THEOI

 CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

 Aeschylus, Agamemnon 

 Aeschylus, Eumenides 

 Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 

 Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 

 Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 

 Aeschylus, Suppliant Women 

 Aeschylus, Fragments 

 Alcman, Fragments 

 Apollodorus, The Library 

 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 

 Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena 

 Bion, Poems 

 Callimachus, Hymns 

 Callistratus, Descriptions 

 Claudian, Gigantomachia 

 Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 

 Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks 

 Clement, Recognitions 

 Colluthus, Rape of Helen 

 Dares Phrygius 

 Dictys Cretensis 

 Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 

 Epic Cycle Fragments 

 Fulgentius, Mythologies 

 Greek Lyric Fragments 

 Hesiod, Shield of Heracles 

 Hesiod, Theogony 

 Hesiod, Works and Days 

 Hesiod, Fragments 

 Homer, Iliad 

 Homer, Odyssey 

 Homeric Hymns 

 Hyginus, Astronomica 

 Hyginus, Fabulae 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 

 Lycophron, Alexandra 

 Moschus, Poems 

 Nonnus, Dionysiaca 

 Orphic Hymns 

 Ovid, Fasti 

 Ovid, Heroides 

 Ovid, Metamorphoses 

 Parthenius, Love Romances 

 Pattern Poems 

 Pausanias, Description of Greece 

 Philostratus the Elder, Imagines 

 Philostratus the Younger, Imagines 

 Plutarch, Life of Theseus 

 Plutarch, Parallel Stories 

 Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy 

 Seneca, Agamemnon 

 Seneca, Hercules Furens 

 Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus 

 Seneca, Medea 

 Seneca, Oedipus 

 Seneca, Phaedra 

 Seneca, Phoenissae 

 Seneca, Thyestes 

 Seneca, Troades 

 Statius, Achilleid 

 Statius, Thebaid 

 Theocritus, Idylls 

 Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios 

 Tzetzes, Chiliades 

 Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica 

 Virgil, Aeneid 

 Virgil, Eclogues 

 Virgil, Georgics 

 RECENT ARTICLES 

 Who Was Achilles A Warrior? 

 What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules? 

 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z 

--> 

 .

 Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

 Contact Us