.

 Toggle navigation 
 Theoi Project - Classical Texts
 Library 

 LIBRARY HOME 
 GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
 GREEK GODS 
 
 Olympian Gods 
 Primordial Gods 
 Titan Gods 
 Sky Gods 
 Sea Gods 
 Rustic Gods 
 Underworld Gods 
 Daemones-Spirits 
 Nymphs 
 more >> 

 BESTIARY 
 HEROES 
 MISCELLANY 
 
 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z 
 Family Tree of the Gods 
 Legendary Tribes 
 Legendary Creatures 
 Star Myths 
 Plant & Flower Myths 

 GALLERY 

 Classical Texts
 Library >> Apollodorus,
 The Library >> Epitome 
 APOLLODORUS, LIBRARY EPITOME 

 THE LIBRARY CONTENTS

 BOOK 1 

 1 . Theogony: Birth of Zeus

 2 . Theogony: War of the Titans

 3 . Theogony: Olympian Gods

 4 . Apollo & Artemis

 5 . Demeter & Persephone

 6 . War of the Giants, Typhon

 7 . Prometheus, Deucalion, Daughters of Aeolus

 8 . Oeneus, Meleager, Tydeus

 9 . Sons of Aeolus, Melampus, Admetus, Pelias, Argonauts

 BOOK 2 

 1 . Io, Danaides

 2 . Proetus, Proetides

 3 . Bellerophon

 4 . Perseus, Sons of Perseus, Amphitryon, Birth of Heracles

 5 . Twelve Labours of Heracles

 6 . Wars of Heracles

 7 . Heracleidae

 BOOK 3 

 1 . Europa, Minos, Pasiphae

 2 . Catreus

 3 . Glaucus

 4 . Cadmus, Semele, Actaeon

 5 . Dionysus, Antiope, Amphion & Zethus, Oedipus

 6 . Seven Against Thebes

 7 . Epigoni

 8 . Lycaon, Callisto

 9 . Auge, Atalanta

 10 . Pleiades, Hermes, Coronis, Asclepius, Leda, Suitors of Helen

 11 . Dioscuri

 12 . Dardanus, Ilus, Priam, Aeacus, Telamon

 13 . Peleus & Thetis

 14 . Cecrops, Adonis, Tereus & Procne, Erichthonius

 15 . Cephalus, Oreithyia, Eumolpus, Aegeus

 16 . Theseus

 EPITOME 

 1 . Theseus cont.

 2 . Tantalus, Pelops, Atreus

 3 . Trojan War: Antehomerica

 4 . Trojan War: Iliad

 5 . Trojan War: Posthomerica

 6 . Trojan War: Returns

 7 . Odyssey & Telegonia

 THE LIBRARY EPITOME, TRANSLATED BY J. G. FRAZER

 [E.1.1] Third, he slew at Crommyon the sow that was called Phaea after the old woman who bred
 it 1 ; that sow, some say, was the offspring of Echidna and Typhon.

 [E.1.2] Fourth, he slew Sciron, the Corinthian, son of Pelops, or, as some say, of Poseidon. He in the Megarian
 territory held the rocks called after him Scironian, and compelled passers-by to wash his feet, and in the act
 of washing he kicked them into the deep to be the prey of a huge turtle.

 [E.1.3] But Theseus seized him by the feet and threw him into the sea. 2 
 Fifth, in Eleusis he slew Cercyon, son of Branchus and a nymph Argiope. This Cercyon compelled passers-by to
 wrestle, and in wrestling killed them. But Theseus lifted him up on high and dashed him to the ground. 3 

 [E.1.4] Sixth, he slew Damastes, whom some call Polypemon. 4 He had his
 dwelling beside the road, and made up two beds, one small and the other big; and offering hospitality to the
 passers-by, he laid the short men on the big bed and hammered them, to make them fit the bed; but the tall men
 he laid on the little bed and sawed off the portions of the body that projected beyond it.

 So, having cleared the road, Theseus came to Athens.

 [E.1.5] But Medea, being then wedded to Aegeus, plotted against him 5 and
 persuaded Aegeus to beware of him as a traitor. And Aegeus, not knowing his own son, was afraid and sent him
 against the Marathonian bull. 

 [E.1.6] And when Theseus had killed it, Aegeus presented to him a poison which he had received the selfsame day
 from Medea. But just as the draught was about to be administered to him, he gave his father the sword, and on
 recognizing it Aegeus dashed the cup from his hands. 6 And when Theseus was
 thus made known to his father and informed of the plot, he expelled Medea.

 [E.1.7] And he was numbered among those who were to be sent as the third tribute to the Minotaur; or, as some
 affirm, he offered himself voluntarily. 7 And as the ship had a black sail,
 Aegeus charged his son, if he returned alive, to spread white sails on the ship. 8 

 [E.1.8] And when he came to Crete, Ariadne, daughter of Minos, being amorously disposed to him, offered to help
 him if he would agree to carry her away to Athens and have her to wife. Theseus having agreed on oath to do so,
 she besought Daedalus to disclose the way out of the labyrinth. 

 [E.1.9] And at his suggestion she gave Theseus a clue when he went in; Theseus fastened it to the door, and,
 drawing it after him, entered in. 9 And having found the Minotaur in the
 last part of the labyrinth, he killed him by smiting him with his fists; and drawing the clue after him made his
 way out again. And by night he arrived with Ariadne and the children 10 at
 Naxos. There Dionysus fell in love with Ariadne and carried her off 11 ; and
 having brought her to Lemnos he enjoyed her, and begat Thoas, Staphylus, Oenopion, and Peparethus. 12 

 [E.1.10] In his grief on account of Ariadne, Theseus forgot to spread white sails on his ship when he stood for
 port; and Aegeus, seeing from the acropolis the ship with a black sail, supposed that Theseus had perished; so
 he cast himself down and died. 13 

 [E.1.11] But Theseus succeeded to the sovereignty of Athens, and killed the sons of Pallas, fifty in
 number 14 ; likewise all who would oppose him were killed by him, and he got
 the whole government to himself.

 [E.1.12] On being apprized of the flight of Theseus and his company, Minos shut up the guilty Daedalus in the
 labyrinth, along with his son Icarus, who had been borne to Daedalus by Naucrate, a female slave of Minos. But
 Daedalus constructed wings for himself and his son, and enjoined his son, when he took to flight, neither to fly
 high, lest the glue should melt in the sun and the wings should drop off, nor to fly near the sea, lest the
 pinions should be detached by the damp. 

 [E.1.13] But the infatuated Icarus, disregarding his father's injunctions, soared ever higher, till, the glue
 melting, he fell into the sea called after him Icarian, and perished. 15 
 But Daedalus made his way safely to Camicus in Sicily. 

 [E.1.14] And Minos pursued Daedalus, and in every country that he searched he carried a spiral shell and
 promised to give a great reward to him who should pass a thread through the shell, believing that by that means
 he should discover Daedalus. And having come to Camicus in Sicily, to the court of Cocalus, with whom Daedalus
 was concealed, he showed the spiral shell. Cocalus took it, and promised to thread it, and gave it to Daedalus;

 [E.1.15] and Daedalus fastened a thread to an ant, and, having bored a hole in the spiral shell, allowed the
 ant to pass through it. But when Minos found the thread passed through the shell, he perceived that Daedalus was
 with Cocalus, and at once demanded his surrender. 16 Cocalus promised to
 surrender him, and made an entertainment for Minos; but after his bath Minos was undone by the daughters of
 Cocalus; some say, however, that he died through being drenched with boiling water. 17 

 [E.1.16] Theseus joined Hercules in his expedition against the Amazons and carried off Antiope, or, as some
 say, Melanippe; but Simonides calls her Hippolyte. 18 Wherefore the Amazons
 marched against Athens, and having taken up a position about the Areopagus 19 they were vanquished by the Athenians under Theseus. And though he had a
 son Hippolytus by the Amazon, 

 [E.1.17] Theseus afterwards received from Deucalion 20 in marriage
 Phaedra, daughter of Minos; and when her marriage was being celebrated, the Amazon that had before been married
 to him appeared in arms with her Amazons, and threatened to kill the assembled guests. But they hastily closed
 the doors and killed her. However, some say that she was slain in battle by Theseus. 

 [E.1.18] And Phaedra, after she had borne two children, Acamas and Demophon, to Theseus, fell in love with the
 son he had by the Amazon, to wit, Hippolytus, and besought him to lie with her. Howbeit, he fled from her
 embraces, because he hated all women. But Phaedra, fearing that he might accuse her to his father, cleft open
 the doors of her bed-chamber, rent her garments, and falsely charged Hippolytus with an assault. 

 [E.1.19] Theseus believed her and prayed to Poseidon that Hippolytus might perish. So, when Hippolytus was
 riding in his chariot and driving beside the sea, Poseidon sent up a bull from the surf, and the horses were
 frightened, the chariot dashed in pieces, and Hippolytus, entangled in the reins, was dragged to death. And when
 her passion was made public, Phaedra hanged herself. 21 

 [E.1.20] Ixion fell in love with Hera and attempted to force her; and when Hera reported it, Zeus, wishing to
 know if the thing were so, made a cloud in the likeness of Hera and laid it beside him; and when Ixion boasted
 that he had enjoyed the favours of Hera, Zeus bound him to a wheel, on which he is whirled by winds through the
 air; such is the penalty he pays. And the cloud, impregnated by Ixion, gave birth to Centaurus. 22 

 [E.1.21] And Theseus allied himself with Pirithous, when he engaged in war against the centaurs. For when
 Pirithous 23 wooed Hippodamia, he feasted the centaurs because they were
 her kinsmen. But being unaccustomed to wine, they made themselves drunk by swilling it greedily, and when the
 bride was brought in, they attempted to violate her. But Pirithous, fully armed, with Theseus, joined battle
 with them, and Theseus killed many of them.

 [E.1.22] Caeneus was formerly a woman, but after that Poseidon had intercourse with her, she asked to become an
 invulnerable man; wherefore in the battle with the centaurs he thought scorn of wounds and killed many of the
 centaurs; but the rest of them surrounded him and by striking him with fir trees buried him in the earth. 24 

 [E.1.23] Having made a compact with Pirithous that they would marry daughters of Zeus, Theseus, with the help
 of Pirithous, carried off Helen from Sparta for himself, when she was twelve years old, 25 and in the endeavor to win Persephone as a bride for Pirithous he went down
 to Hades. And the Dioscuri, with the Lacedaemonians and Arcadians, captured Athens and carried away Helen, and
 with her Aethra, daughter of Pittheus, into captivity 26 ; but Demophon and
 Acamas fled. And the Dioscuri also brought back Menestheus from exile, and gave him the sovereignty of
 Athens. 27 

 [E.1.24] But when Theseus arrived with Pirithous in Hades, he was beguiled; for, on the pretence that they were
 about to partake of good cheer, Hades bade them first be seated on the Chair of Forgetfulness, to which they
 grew and were held fast by coils of serpents. Pirithous, therefore, remained bound for ever, but Hercules
 brought Theseus up and sent him to Athens. 28 Thence he was driven by
 Menestheus and went to Lycomedes, who threw him down an abyss and killed him. 29 

 [E.2.1] Tantalus is punished in Hades by having a stone impending over him, by being
 perpetually in a lake and seeing at his shoulders on either side trees with fruit growing beside the lake. The
 water touches his jaws, but when he would take a draught of it, the water dries up; and when he would partake of
 the fruits, the trees with the fruits are lifted by winds as high as the clouds. Some say that he is thus
 punished because he blabbed to men the mysteries of the gods, and because he attempted to share ambrosia with
 his fellows. 30 

 [E.2.2] Broteas, a hunter, did not honor Artemis, and said that even fire could not hurt him. So he went mad
 and threw himself into fire. 31 

 [E.2.3] Pelops, after being slaughtered and boiled at the banquet of the gods, was fairer than ever when he
 came to life again, 32 and on account of his surpassing beauty he became a
 minion of Poseidon, who gave him a winged chariot, such that even when it ran through the sea the axles were not
 wet. 33 

 [E.2.4] Now Oenomaus, the king of Pisa, had a daughter Hippodamia, 34 and
 whether it was that he loved her, as some say, or that he was warned by an oracle that he must die by the man
 that married her, no man got her to wife; for her father could not persuade her to cohabit with him, and her
 suitors were put by him to death.

 [E.2.5] For he had arms and horses given him by Ares, and he offered as a prize to the suitors the hand of his
 daughter, and each suitor was bound to take up Hippodamia on his own chariot and flee as far as the Isthmus of
 Corinth, and Oenomaus straightway pursued him, in full armour, and if he overtook him he slew him; but if the
 suitor were not overtaken, he was to have Hippodamia to wife. And in this way he slew many suitors, some say
 twelve 35 ; and he cut off the heads of the suitors and nailed them to his
 house. 36 

 [E.2.6] So Pelops also came a-wooing; and when Hippodamia saw his beauty, she conceived a passion for him, and
 persuaded Myrtilus, son of Hermes, to help him; for Myrtilus was charioteer to Oenomaus.

 [E.2.7] Accordingly Myrtilus, being in love with her and wishing to gratify her, did not insert the linchpins
 in the boxes of the wheels, 37 and thus caused Oenomaus to lose the race
 and to be entangled in the reins and dragged to death; but according to some, he was killed by Pelops. And in
 dying he cursed Myrtilus, whose treachery he had discovered, praying that he might perish by the hand of Pelops.

 [E.2.8] Pelops, therefore, got Hippodamia; and on his journey, in which he was accompanied by Myrtilus, he came
 to a certain place, and withdrew a little to fetch water for his wife, who was athirst; and in the meantime
 Myrtilus tried to rape her. 38 But when Pelops learned that from her, he
 threw Myrtilus into the sea, called after him the Myrtoan Sea, at Cape Geraestus 39 ; and Myrtilus, as he was being thrown, uttered curses against the house of
 Pelops. 

 [E.2.9] When Pelops had reached the Ocean and been cleansed by Hephaestus, 40 he returned to Pisa in Elis and succeeded to the kingdom of Oenomaus, but
 not till he had subjugated what was formerly called Apia and Pelasgiotis, which he called Peloponnesus after
 himself. 41 

 [E.2.10] The sons of Pelops were Pittheus, Atreus, Thyestes, and others. 42 Now the wife of Atreus was Aerope, daughter of Catreus, and she loved
 Thyestes. And Atreus once vowed to sacrifice to Artemis the finest of his flocks; but when a golden lamb
 appeared, they say that he neglected to perform his vow,

 [E.2.11] and having choked the lamb, he deposited it in a box and kept it there, and Aerope gave it to
 Thyestes, by whom she had been debauched. For the Mycenaeans had received an oracle which bade them choose a
 Pelopid for their king, and they had sent for Atreus and Thyestes. And when a discussion took place concerning
 the kingdom, Thyestes declared to the multitude that the kingdom ought to belong to him who owned the golden
 lamb, and when Atreus agreed, Thyestes produced the lamb and was made king. 

 [E.2.12] But Zeus sent Hermes to Atreus and told him to stipulate with Thyestes that Atreus should be king if
 the sun should go backward; and when Thyestes agreed, the sun set in the east; hence the deity having plainly
 attested the usurpation of Thyestes, Atreus got the kingdom and banished Thyestes. 43 

 [E.2.13] But afterwards being apprized of the adultery, he sent a herald to Thyestes with a proposal of
 accommodation; and when he had lured Thyestes by a pretence of friendship, he slaughtered the sons, Aglaus,
 Callileon, and Orchomenus, whom Thyestes had by a Naiad nymph, though they had sat down as suppliants on the
 altar of Zeus. And having cut them limb from limb and boiled them, he served them up to Thyestes without the
 extremities; and when Thyestes had eaten heartily of them, he showed him the extremities, and cast him out of
 the country. 44 

 [E.2.14] But seeking by all means to pay Atreus out, Thyestes inquired of the oracle on the subject, and
 received an answer that it could be done if he were to beget a son by intercourse with his own daughter. He did
 so accordingly, and begot Aegisthus by his daughter. And Aegisthus, when he was grown to manhood and had learned
 that he was a son of Thyestes, killed Atreus, and restored the kingdom to Thyestes. 45 

 [E.2.15] But 46 the nurse took Agamemnon and Menelaus to Polyphides, lord
 of Sicyon, 47 who again sent them to Oeneus, the Aetolian. Not long
 afterwards Tyndareus brought them back again, and they drove away Thyestes to dwell in Cytheria, after that they
 had taken an oath of him at the altar of Hera, to which he had fled. And they became the sons-in-law of
 Tyndareus by marrying his daughters, Agamemnon getting Clytaemnestra to wife, after he had slain her spouse
 Tantalus, the son of Thyestes, together with his newborn babe, while Menelaus got Helen.

 [E.2.16] And Agamemnon reigned over the Mycenaeans and married Clytaemnestra, daughter of Tyndareus, after
 slaying her former husband Tantalus, son of Thyestes, with his child. 48 
 And there were born to Agamemnon a son Orestes, and daughters, Chrysothemis, Electra, and Iphigenia. 49 And Menelaus married Helen and reigned over Sparta, Tyndareus having ceded
 the kingdom to him. 50 

 [E.3.1] But afterwards Alexander carried off Helen, as some say, because such was the will of
 Zeus, in order that his daughter might be famous for having embroiled Europe and Asia; or, as others have said,
 that the race of the demigods might be exalted.

 [E.3.2] For one of these reasons Strife threw an apple as a prize of beauty to be contended for by Hera,
 Athena, and Aphrodite; and Zeus commanded Hermes to lead them to Alexander on Ida in order to be judged by him.
 And they promised to give Alexander gifts. Hera said that if she were preferred to all women, she would give him
 the kingdom over all men; and Athena promised victory in war, and Aphrodite the hand of Helen. And he decided in
 favour of Aphrodite 51 ; and sailed away to Sparta with ships built by
 Phereclus. 52 

 [E.3.3] For nine days he was entertained by Menelaus; but on the tenth day, Menelaus having gone on a journey
 to Crete to perform the obsequies of his mother's father Catreus, Alexander persuaded Helen to go off 53 with him. And she abandoned Hermione, then nine years old, and putting most
 of the property on board, she set sail with him by night. 54 

 [E.3.4] But Hera sent them a heavy storm which forced them to put in at Sidon. And fearing lest he should be
 pursued, Alexander spent much time in Phoenicia and Cyprus. 55 But when he
 thought that all chance of pursuit was over, he came to Troy with Helen. 

 [E.3.5] But some say that Hermes, in obedience to the will of Zeus, stole Helen and carried her to Egypt, and
 gave her to Proteus, king of the Egyptians, to guard, and that Alexander repaired to Troy with a phantom of
 Helen fashioned out of clouds. 56 

 [E.3.6] When Menelaus was aware of the rape, he came to Agamemnon at Mycenae, and begged him to muster an army
 against Troy and to raise levies in Greece. And he, sending a herald to each of the kings, reminded them of the
 oaths which they had sworn, 57 and warned them to look to the safety each
 of his own wife, saying that the affront had been offered equally to the whole of Greece. And while many were
 eager to join in the expedition, some repaired also to Ulysses in Ithaca. 

 [E.3.7] But he, not wishing to go to the war, feigned madness. However, Palamedes, son of Nauplius, proved his
 madness to be fictitious; and when Ulysses pretended to rave, Palamedes followed him, and snatching Telemachus
 from Penelope's bosom, drew his sword as if he would kill him. And in his fear for the child Ulysses confessed
 that his madness was pretended, and he went to the war. 58 

 [E.3.8] Having taken a Phrygian prisoner, Ulysses compelled him to write a letter of treasonable purport
 ostensibly sent by Priam to Palamedes; and having buried gold in the quarters of Palamedes, he dropped the
 letter in the camp. Agamemnon read the letter, found the gold, and delivered up Palamedes to the allies to be
 stoned as a traitor. 59 

 [E.3.9] Menelaus went with Ulysses and Talthybius to Cinyras in Cyprus and tried to persuade him to join the
 allies. He made a present of breastplates to the absent Agamemnon, 60 and
 swore he would send fifty ships, but he sent only one, commanded by the son of Mygdalion, and the rest he
 moulded out of earth and launched them in the sea. 61 

 [E.3.10] The daughters of Anius, the son of Apollo, to wit, Elais, Spermo, and Oeno, are called the
 Wine-growers: Dionysus granted them the power of producing oil, corn, and wine from the earth. 62 

 [E.3.11] The armament mustered in Aulis. The men who went to the Trojan war were as follows 63 :- Of the Boeotians, ten leaders: they brought forty ships. Of the
 Orchomenians, four: they brought thirty ships. Of the Phocians, four leaders: they brought forty ships. Of the
 Locrians, Ajax, son of Oeleus: he brought forty ships. Of the Euboeans, Elephenor, son of Chalcodon and Alcyone:
 he brought forty ships. Of the Athenians, Menestheus: he brought fifty ships. Of the Salaminians, Telamonian
 Ajax: he brought twelve ships.

 [E.3.12] Of the Argives, Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and his company: they brought eighty ships. Of the
 Mycenaeans, Agamemnon, son of Atreus and Aerope: a hundred ships. Of the Lacedaemonians, Menelaus, son of Atreus
 and Aerope: sixty ships. Of the Pylians, Nestor, son of Neleus and Chloris: forty ships. Of the Arcadians,
 Agapenor: seven ships. Of the Eleans, Amphimachus and his company: forty ships. Of the Dulichians, Meges, son of
 Phyleus: forty ships. Of the Cephallenians, Ulysses, son of Laertes and Anticlia: twelve ships. Of the
 Aetolians, Thoas, son of Andraemon and Gorge: he brought forty ships. 

 [E.3.13] Of the Cretans, Idomeneus, son of Deucalion: forty ships. Of the Rhodians, Tlepolemus, son of Hercules
 and Astyoche: nine ships. Of the Symaeans, Nireus, son of Charopus: three ships. Of the Coans, Phidippus and
 Antiphus, the sons of Thessalus: thirty ships.

 [E.3.14] Of the Myrmidons, Achilles, son of Peleus and Thetis: fifty ships. From Phylace, Protesilaus, son of
 Iphiclus: forty ships. Of the Pheraeans, Eumelus, son of Admetus: eleven ships. Of the Olizonians, Philoctetes,
 son of Poeas: seven ships. Of the Aeanianians, Guneus, son of Ocytus: twenty-two ships. Of the Triccaeans,
 Podalirius:thirty ships. Of the Ormenians, Eurypylus: forty ships. Of the Gyrtonians, Polypoetes, son of
 Pirithous: thirty ships. Of the Magnesians, Prothous, son of Tenthredon: forty ships. The total of ships was one
 thousand and thirteen; of leaders, forty-three; of leaderships, thirty. 

 [E.3.15] When the armament was in Aulis, after a sacrifice to Apollo, a serpent darted from the altar beside
 the neighboring plane-tree, in which there was a nest; and having consumed the eight sparrows in the nest,
 together with the mother bird, which made the ninth, it was turned to stone. Calchas said that this sign was
 given them by the will of Zeus, and he inferred from what had happened that Troy was destined to be taken in a
 period of ten years. 64 And they made ready to sail against Troy. 

 [E.3.16] So Agamemnon in person was in command of the whole army, and Achilles was admiral, 65 being fifteen years old.

 [E.3.17] But not knowing the course to steer for Troy, they put in to Mysia and ravaged it, supposing it to be
 Troy. 66 Now Telephus son of Hercules, was king of the Mysians, and seeing
 the country pillaged, he armed the Mysians, chased the Greeks in a crowd to the ships, and killed many, among
 them Thersander, son of Polynices, who had made a stand. But when Achilles rushed at him, Telephus did not abide
 the onset and was pursued, and in the pursuit he was entangled in a vine-branch and wounded with a spear in the
 thigh. 

 [E.3.18] Departing from Mysia, the Greeks put to sea, and a violent storm coming on, they were separated from
 each other and landed in their own countries. 67 So the Greeks returned at
 that time, and it is said that the war lasted twenty years. 68 For it was
 in the second year after the rape of Helen that the Greeks, having completed their preparations, set out on the
 expedition and after their retirement from Mysia to Greece eight years elapsed before they again returned to
 Argos and came to Aulis.

 [E.3.19] Having again assembled at Aulis after the aforesaid interval of eight years, they were in great
 perplexity about the voyage, because they had no leader who could show them the way to Troy. 

 [E.3.20] But Telephus, because his wound was unhealed, and Apollo had told him that he would be cured when the
 one who wounded him should turn physician, came from Mysia to Argos, clad in rags, and begged the help of
 Achilles, promising to show the course to steer for Troy. So Achilles healed him by scraping off the rust of his
 Pelian spear. Accordingly, on being healed, Telephus showed the course to steer, 69 and the accuracy of his information was confirmed by Calchas by means of
 his own art of divination.

 [E.3.21] But when they had put to sea from Argos and arrived for the second time at Aulis, the fleet was
 windbound, and Calchas said that they could not sail unless the fairest of Agamemnon's daughters were presented
 as a sacrifice to Artemis; for the goddess was angry with Agamemnon, both because, on shooting a deer, he had
 said, “Artemis herself could not (do it better),” 70 and
 because Atreus had not sacrificed to her the golden lamb. 

 [E.3.22] On receipt of this oracle, Agamemnon sent Ulysses and Talthybius to Clytaemnestra and asked for
 Iphigenia, alleging a promise of his to give her to Achilles to wife in reward for his military service. So
 Clytaemnestra sent her, and Agamemnon set her beside the altar, and was about to slaughter her, when Artemis
 carried her off to the Taurians and appointed her to be her priestess, substituting a deer for her at the altar;
 but some say that Artemis made her immortal. 71 

 [E.3.23] After putting to sea from Aulis they touched at Tenedos. It was ruled by Tenes, son of Cycnus and
 Proclia, but according to some, he was a son of Apollo. He dwelt there because he had been banished by his
 father. 72 

 [E.3.24] For Cycnus had a son Tenes and a daughter Hemithea by Proclia, daughter of Laomedon, but he afterwards
 married Philonome, daughter of Tragasus; and she fell in love with Tenes, and, failing to seduce him, falsely
 accused him to Cycnus of attempting to debauch her, and in witness of it she produced a flute-player, by name
 Eumolpus. 

 [E.3.25] Cycnus believed her, and putting him and his sister in a chest he set them adrift on the sea. The
 chest was washed up on the island of Leucophrys, and Tenes landed and settled in the island, and called it
 Tenedos after himself. But Cycnus afterwards learning the truth, stoned the flute-player to death and buried his
 wife alive in the earth.

 [E.3.26] So when the Greeks were standing in for Tenedos, Tenes saw them and tried to keep them off by throwing
 stones, but was killed by Achilles with a sword-cut in the breast, though Thetis had forewarned Achilles not to
 kill Tenes, because he himself would die by the hand of Apollo if he slew Tenes. 73 

 [E.3.27] and as they were offering a sacrifice to Apollo, a water-snake approached from the altar and bit
 Philoctetes; and as the sore did not heal and grew noisome, the army could not endure the stench, and Ulysses,
 by the orders of Agamemnon, put him ashore on the island of Lemnos, with the bow of Hercules which he had in his
 possession; and there, by shooting birds with the bow, he subsisted in the wilderness. 74 

 [E.3.28] Putting to sea from Tenedos they made sail for Troy, and sent Ulysses and Menelaus to demand the
 restoration of Helen and the property. But the Trojans, having summoned an assembly, not only refused to restore
 Helen, but threatened to kill the envoys. 

 [E.3.29] These were, however, saved by Antenor 75 ; but the Greeks,
 exasperated at the insolence of the barbarians, stood to arms and made sail against them. Now Thetis charged
 Achilles not to be the first to land from the ships, because the first to land would be the first to die. Being
 apprized of the hostile approach of the fleet, the barbarians marched in arms to the sea, and endeavored by
 throwing stones to prevent the landing.

 [E.3.30] Of the Greeks the first to land from his ship was Protesilaus, and having slain not a few of the
 barbarians, he fell by the hand of Hector. 76 His wife Laodamia loved him
 even after his death, and she made an image of him and consorted with it. The gods had pity on her, and Hermes
 brought up Protesilaus from Hades. On seeing him, Laodamia thought it was himself returned from Troy, and she
 was glad; but when he was carried back to Hades, she stabbed herself to death. 77 

 [E.3.31] On the death of Protesilaus, Achilles landed with the Myrmidons, and throwing a stone at the head of
 Cycnus, killed him. 78 When the barbarians saw him dead, they fled to the
 city, and the Greeks, leaping from their ships, filled the plain with bodies. and having shut up the Trojans,
 they besieged them; and they drew up the ships. 

 [E.3.32] The barbarians showing no courage, Achilles waylaid Troilus and slaughtered him in the sanctuary of
 Thymbraean Apollo, 79 and coming by night to the city he captured
 Lycaon. 80 Moreover, taking some of the chiefs with him, Achilles laid
 waste the country, and made his way to Ida to lift the kine of Aeneas. But Aeneas fled, and Achilles killed the
 neatherds and Nestor, son of Priam, and drove away the kine. 81 

 [E.3.33] He also took Lesbos 82 and Phocaea, then Colophon, and Smyrna,
 and Clazomenae, and Cyme; and afterwards Aegialus and Tenos, the so-called Hundred Cities; then, in order,
 Adramytium and Side; then Endium, and Linaeum, and Colone. He took also Hypoplacian Thebes 83 and Lyrnessus, 84 and further
 Antandrus, and many other cities. 

 [E.3.34] A period of nine years having elapsed, allies came to join the Trojans 85 : from the surrounding cities, Aeneas, son of Anchises, and with him
 Archelochus and Acamas, sons of Antenor, and Theanus, leaders of the Dardanians; of the Thracians, Acamas, son
 of Eusorus; of the Cicones, Euphemus, son of Troezenus; of the Paeonians, Pyraechmes; of the Paphlagonians,
 Pylaemenes, son of Bilsates;

 [E.3.35] from Zelia, Pandarus, son of Lycaon; from Adrastia, Adrastus and Amphius, sons of Merops; from Arisbe,
 Asius, son of Hyrtacus; from Larissa, Hippothous, son of Pelasgus 86 ; from
 Mysia, Chromius 87 and Ennomus, sons of Arsinous; of the Alizones, Odius
 and Epistrophus, sons of Mecisteus; of the Phrygians, Phorcys and Ascanius, sons of Aretaon; of the Maeonians,
 Mesthles and Antiphus, sons of Talaemenes; of the Carians, Nastes and Amphimachus, sons of Nomion; of the
 Lycians, Sarpedon, son of Zeus, and Glaucus, son of Hippolochus. 

 [E.4.1] Achilles did not go forth to the war, because he was angry on account of Briseis, ...
 the daughter of Chryses the priest. 88 Therefore the barbarians took heart
 of grace and sallied out of the city. And Alexander fought a single combat with Menelaus; and when Alexander got
 the worst of it, Aphrodite carried him off. 89 And Pandarus, by shooting an
 arrow at Menelaus, broke the truce. 90 

 [E.4.2] Diomedes, doing doughty deeds, wounded Aphrodite when she came to the help of Aeneas 91 ; and encountering Glaucus, he recalled the friendship of their fathers and
 exchanged arms. 92 And Hector having challenged the bravest to single
 combat, many came forward, but the lot fell on Ajax, and he did doughty deeds; but night coming on, the heralds
 parted them. 93 

 [E.4.3] The Greeks made a wall and a ditch to protect the roadstead, 94 
 and a battle taking place in the plain, the Trojans chased the Greeks within the wall. 95 But the Greeks sent Ulysses, Phoenix, and Ajax as ambassadors to Achilles,
 begging him to fight for them, and promising Briseis and other gifts. 96 

 [E.4.4] And night coming on, they sent Ulysses and Diomedes as spies; and these killed Dolon, son of Eumelus,
 and Rhesus, the Thracian (who had arrived the day before as an ally of the Trojans, and having not yet engaged
 in the battle was encamped at some distance from the Trojan force and apart from Hector); they also slew the
 twelve men that were sleeping around him, and drove the horses to the ships. 97 

 [E.4.5] But by day a fierce fight took place; Agamemnon and Diomedes, Ulysses, Eurypylus, and Machaon were
 wounded, the Greeks were put to flight 98 Hector made a breach in the wall
 and entered 99 and, Ajax having retreated, he set fire to the ships. 100 

 [E.4.6] But when Achilles saw the ship of Protesilaus burning, he sent out Patroclus with the Myrmidons, after
 arming him with his own arms and giving him the horses. Seeing him the Trojans thought that he was Achilles and
 turned to flee. And having chased them within the wall, he killed many, amongst them Sarpedon, son of Zeus, and
 was himself killed by Hector, after being first wounded by Euphorbus. 101 

 [E.4.7] And a fierce fight taking place for the corpse, Ajax with difficulty, by performing feats of valor,
 rescued the body. 102 And Achilles laid aside his anger and recovered
 Briseis. And a suit of armour having been brought him from Hephaestus, he donned the armour 103 and went forth to the war, and chased the Trojans in a crowd to the
 Scamander, and there killed many, and amongst them Asteropaeus, son of Pelegon, son of the river Axius; and the
 river rushed at him in fury. But Hephaestus dried up the streams of the river, after chasing them with a mighty
 flame. 104 And Achilles slew Hector in single combat, and fastening his
 ankles to his chariot dragged him to the ships. 105 And having buried
 Patroclus, he celebrated games in his honor, at which Diomedes was victorious in the chariot race, Epeus in
 boxing, and Ajax and Ulysses in wrestling. 106 And after the games Priam
 came to Achilles and ransomed the body of Hector, and buried it. 107 

 [E.5.1] Penthesilia, daughter of Otrere and Ares, accidentally killed Hippolyte and was
 purified by Priam. In battle she slew many, and amongst them Machaon, and was afterwards herself killed by
 Achilles, who fell in love with the Amazon after her death and slew Thersites for jeering at him. 108 

 [E.5.2] Hippolyte was the mother of Hippolytus; she also goes by the names of Glauce and Melanippe. For when
 the marriage of Phaedra was being celebrated, Hippolyte appeared in arms with her Amazons, and said that she
 would slay the guests of Theseus. So a battle took place, and she was killed, whether involuntarily by her ally
 Penthesilia, or by Theseus, or because his men, seeing the threatening attitude of the Amazons, hastily closed
 the doors and so intercepted and slew her. 109 

 [E.5.3] Memnon, the son of Tithonus and the Dawn, came with a great force of Ethiopians to Troy against the
 Greeks, and having slain many of the Greeks, including Antilochus, he was himself slain by Achilles. 110 Having chased the Trojans also, Achilles was shot with an arrow in the
 ankle by Alexander and Apollo at the Scaean gate.

 [E.5.4] A fight taking place for the corpse, Ajax killed Glaucus, and gave the arms to be conveyed to the
 ships, but the body he carried, in a shower of darts, through the midst of the enemy, while Ulysses fought his
 assailants. 111 

 [E.5.5] The death of Achilles filled the army with dismay, and they buried him with Patroclus in the White
 Isle, mixing the bones of the two together. 112 It is said that after
 death Achilles consorts with Medea in the Isles of the Blest. 113 And they
 held games in his honor, at which Eumelus won the chariot-race, Diomedes the footrace, Ajax the quoit match, and
 Teucer the competition in archery. 114 

 [E.5.6] Also his arms were offered as a prize to the bravest, and Ajax and Ulysses came forward as competitors.
 The judges were the Trojans or, according to some, the allies, and Ulysses was preferred. Disordered by chagrin,
 Ajax planned a nocturnal attack on the army. And Athena drove him mad, and turned him, sword in hand, among the
 cattle, and in his frenzy he slaughtered the cattle with the herdsmen, taking them for the Achaeans.

 [E.5.7] But afterwards he came to his senses and slew also himself. 115 
 And Agamemnon forbade his body to be burnt; and he alone of all who fell at Ilium is buried, in a coffin. 116 His grave is at Rhoeteum.

 [E.5.8] When the war had already lasted ten years, and the Greeks were despondent, Calchas prophesied to them
 that Troy could not be taken unless they had the bow and arrows of Hercules fighting on their side. On hearing
 that, Ulysses went with Diomedes to Philoctetes in Lemnos, and having by craft got possession of the bow and
 arrows he persuaded him to sail to Troy. So he went, and after being cured by Podalirius, he shot
 Alexander. 117 

 [E.5.9] After the death of Alexander, Helenus and Deiphobus quarrelled as to which of them should marry Helen;
 and as Deiphobus was preferred, Helenus left Troy and abode in Ida. 118 
 But as Chalcas said that Helenus knew the oracles that protected the city, Ulysses waylaid and captured him and
 brought him to the camp; 

 [E.5.10] and Helenus was forced to tell how Ilium could be taken, 119 to
 wit, first, if the bones of Pelops were brought to them; next, if Neoptolemus fought for them; and third, if the
 Palladium, 120 which had fallen from heaven, were stolen from Troy, for
 while it was within the walls the city could not be taken.

 [E.5.11] On hearing these things the Greeks caused the bones of Pelops to be fetched, and they sent Ulysses and
 Phoenix to Lycomedes at Scyros, and these two persuaded him to let Neoptolemus go. 121 On coming to the camp and receiving his father's arms from Ulysses, who
 willingly resigned them, Neoptolemus slew many of the Trojans.

 [E.5.12] Afterwards, Eurypylus, son of Telephus, arrived to fight for the Trojans, bringing a great force of
 Mysians. He performed doughty deeds, but was slain by Neoptolemus. 122 

 [E.5.13] And Ulysses went with Diomedes by night to the city, and there he let Diomedes wait, and after
 disfiguring himself and putting on mean attire he entered unknown into the city as a beggar. And being
 recognized by Helen, he with her help stole away the Palladium, and after killing many of the guards, brought it
 to the ships with the aid of Diomedes. 123 

 [E.5.14] But afterwards he invented the construction of the Wooden Horse and suggested it to Epeus, who was an
 architect. 124 Epeus felled timber on Ida, and constructed the horse with
 a hollow interior and an opening in the sides. Into this horse Ulysses persuaded fifty (or, according to the
 author of the Little Iliad , three thousand) of the doughtiest to enter, 125 while the rest, when night had fallen, were to burn their tents, and,
 putting to sea, to lie to off Tenedos, but to sail back to land after the ensuing night.

 [E.5.15] They followed the advice of Ulysses and introduced the doughtiest into the horse, after appointing
 Ulysses their leader and engraving on the horse an inscription which signified, “For their return home,
 the Greeks dedicate this thank-offering to Athena.” But they themselves burned their tents, and leaving
 Sinon, who was to light a beacon as a signal to them, they put to sea by night, and lay to off Tenedos.

 [E.5.16] And at break of day, when the Trojans beheld the camp of the Greeks deserted and believed that they
 had fled, they with great joy dragged the horse, and stationing it beside the palace of Priam deliberated what
 they should do. 

 [E.5.17] As Cassandra said that there was an armed force in it, and she was further confirmed by Laocoon, the
 seer, some were for burning it, and others for throwing it down a precipice; but as most were in favour of
 sparing it as a votive offering sacred to a divinity, 126 they betook them
 to sacrifice and feasting. 

 [E.5.18] However, Apollo sent them a sign; for two serpents swam through the sea from the neighboring islands
 and devoured the sons of Laocoon. 127 

 [E.5.19] And when night fell, and all were plunged in sleep, the Greeks drew near by sea from Tenedos, and
 Sinon kindled the beacon on the grave of Achilles to guide them. 128 And
 Helen, going round the horse, called the chiefs, imitating the voices of each of their wives. But when Anticlus
 would have answered, Ulysses held fast his mouth. 129 

 [E.5.20] and when they thought that their foes were asleep, they opened the horse and came forth with their
 arms. The first, Echion, son of Portheus, was killed by leaping from it; but the rest let themselves down by a
 rope, and lighted on the walls, and having opened the gates they admitted their comrades who had landed from
 Tenedos. 

 [E.5.21] And marching, arms in hand, into the city, they entered the houses and slew the sleepers. Neoptolemus
 slew Priam, who had taken refuge at the altar of Zeus of the Courtyard. 130 But when Glaucus, son of Antenor, fled to his house, Ulysses and Menelaus
 recognized and rescued him by their armed intervention. 131 Aeneas took up
 his father Anchises and fled, and the Greeks let him alone on account of his piety. 132 

 [E.5.22] But Menelaus slew Deiphobus and led away Helen to the ships 133 ;
 and Aethra, mother of Theseus, was also led away by Demophon and Acamas, the sons of Theseus; for they say that
 they afterwards went to Troy. 134 And the Locrian Ajax, seeing Cassandra
 clinging to the wooden image of Athena, violated her; therefore they say that the image looks to heaven. 135 

 [E.5.23] And having slain the Trojans, they set fire to the city and divided the spoil among them. And having
 sacrificed to all the gods, they threw Astyanax from the battlements 136 
 and slaughtered Polyxena on the grave of Achilles. 137 And as special
 awards Agamemnon got Cassandra, Neoptolemus got Andromache, and Ulysses got Hecuba. 138 But some say that Helenus got her, and crossed over with her to the
 Chersonese 139 ; and that there she turned into a bitch, and he buried her
 at the place now called the Bitch's Tomb. 140 As for Laodice, the fairest
 of the daughters of Priam, she was swallowed up by a chasm in the earth in the sight of all. 141 When they had laid Troy waste and were about to sail away, they were
 detained by Calchas, who said that Athena was angry with them on account of the impiety of Ajax. And they would
 have killed Ajax, but he fled to the altar and they let him alone. 142 

 [E.6.1] After these things they met in assembly, and Agamemnon and Menelaus quarrelled,
 Menelaus advising that they should sail away, and Agamemnon insisting that they should stay and sacrifice to
 Athena. When they put to sea, Diomedes, Nestor, and Menelaus in company, the two former had a prosperous voyage,
 but Menelaus was overtaken by a storm, and after losing the rest of his vessels, arrived with five ships in
 Egypt. 143 

 [E.6.2] But Amphilochus, and Calchas, and Leonteus, and Podalirius, and Polypoetes left their ships in Ilium
 and journeyed by land to Colophon, and there buried Calchas the diviner 144 ; for it was foretold him that he would die if he met with a wiser diviner
 than himself. 

 [E.6.3] Well, they were lodged by the diviner Mopsus, who was a son of Apollo and Manto, and he wrangled with
 Calchas about the art of divination. A wild fig-tree grew on the spot, and when Calchas asked, “How many
 figs does it bear?” Mopsus answered, “Ten thousand, and a bushel, and one fig over,” and they
 were found to be so.

 [E.6.4] And when Mopsus asked Calchas concerning a pregnant sow, “How many pigs has she in her womb, and
 when will she farrow?” Calchas answered, “Eight.” But Mopsus smiled and said, “The
 divination of Calchas is the reverse of exact; but I, as a son of Apollo and Manto, am extremely rich in the
 sharp sight which comes of exact divination, and I divine that the number of pigs in the womb is not eight, as
 Calchas says, but nine, and that they are all male and will be farrowed without fail tomorrow at the sixth
 hour.” So when these things turned out so, Calchas died of a broken heart and was buried at Notium. 145 

 [E.6.5] After sacrificing, Agamemnon put to sea and touched at Tenedos. But Thetis came and persuaded
 Neoptolemus to wait two days and to offer sacrifice; and he waited. But the others put to sea and encountered a
 storm at Tenos; for Athena entreated Zeus to send a tempest against the Greeks; and many ships foundered. 

 [E.6.6] And Athena threw a thunderbolt at the ship of Ajax; and when the ship went to pieces he made his way
 safe to a rock, and declared that he was saved in spite of the intention of Athena. But Poseidon smote the rock
 with his trident and split it, and Ajax fell into the sea and perished; and his body, being washed up, was
 buried by Thetis in Myconos. 146 

 [E.6.7] The others being driven to Euboea by night, Nauplius kindled a beacon on Mount Caphareus; and they,
 thinking it was some of those who were saved, stood in for the shore, and the vessels were wrecked on the
 Capherian rocks, and many men perished. 147 

 [E.6.8] For Palamedes, the son of Nauplius and Clymene daughter of Catreus, had been stoned to death through
 the machinations of Ulysses. 148 And when Nauplius learned of it, 149 he sailed to the Greeks and claimed satisfaction for the death of his
 son; 

 [E.6.9] but when he returned unsuccessful (for they all favoured King Agamemnon, who had been the accomplice of
 Ulysses in the murder of Palamedes), he coasted along the Grecian lands and contrived that the wives of the
 Greeks should play their husbands false, Clytaemnestra with Aegisthus, Aegialia with Cometes, son of Sthenelus,
 and Meda, wife of Idomeneus, with Leucus. 

 [E.6.10] But Leucus killed her, together with her daughter Clisithyra, who had taken refuge in the temple; and
 having detached ten cities from Crete he made himself tyrant of them; and when after the Trojan war Idomeneus
 landed in Crete, Leucus drove him out. 150 

 [E.6.11] These were the earlier contrivances of Nauplius; but afterwards, when he learned that the Greeks were
 on their way home to their native countries, he kindled the beacon fire on Mount Caphereus, which is now called
 Xylophagus; and there the Greeks, standing in shore in the belief that it was a harbor, were cast away.

 [E.6.12] After remaining in Tenedos two days at the advice of Thetis, Neoptolemus set out for the country of
 the Molossians by land with Helenus, and on the way Phoenix died, and Neoptolemus buried him 151 ; and having vanquished the Molossians in battle he reigned as king and
 begat Molossus on Andromache. And 

 [E.6.13] Helenus founded a city in Molossia and inhabited it, and Neoptolemus gave him his mother Deidamia to
 wife. 152 And when Peleus was expelled from Phthia by the sons of
 Acastus 153 and died, Neoptolemus succeeded to his father's kingdom.

 [E.6.14] And when Orestes went mad, Neoptolemus carried off his wife Hermione, who had previously been
 betrothed to him in Troy 154 ; and for that reason he was slain by Orestes
 at Delphi. But some say that he went to Delphi to demand satisfaction from Apollo for the death of his father,
 and that he rifled the votive offerings and set fire to the temple, and was on that account slain by Machaereus
 the Phocian. 155 

 [E.6.15] After their wanderings the Greeks landed and settled in various countries, some in Libya, some in
 Italy, others in Sicily, and some in the islands near Iberia, others on the banks of the Sangarius river; and
 some settled also in Cyprus. And of those that were shipwrecked at Caphereus, some drifted one way and some
 another. 156 Guneus went to Libya; Antiphus, son of Thessalus, went to the
 Pelasgians, and, having taken possession of the country, called it Thessaly. Philoctetes went to the Campanians
 in Italy; Phidippus with the Coans settled in Andros, Agapenor in Cyprus, 157 and others elsewhere.

 [E.6.15a] Apollodorus and the rest 158 say as follows. Guneus left his
 own ships, and having come to the Cinyps river in Libya he dwelt there. 159 But Meges and Prothous, with many others, were cast away at Caphereus in
 Euboea 160 . . . and when Prothous was shipwrecked at Caphereus, the
 Magnesians with him drifted to Crete and settled there. (Tzetzes, Scholia on Lycophron , 902) 

 [E.6.15b] After the sack of Ilium, 161 Menestheus, Phidippus and
 Antiphus, and the people of Elephenor, and Philoctetes sailed together as far as Mimas. Then Menestheus went to
 Melos and reigned as king, because the king there, Polyanax, had died. And Antiphus the son of Thessalus went to
 the Pelasgians, and having taken possession of the country he called it Thessaly. 162 Phidippus with the Coans was driven first to Andros, and then to Cyprus,
 where he settled. Elephenor died in Troy, 163 but his people were cast
 away in the Ionian gulf and inhabited Apollonia in Epirus. And the people of Tlepolemus touched at Crete; then
 they were driven out of their course by winds and settled in the Iberian islands . . . The people of Protesilaus
 were cast away on Pellene near the plain of Canastrum. 164 And Philoctetes
 was driven to Campania in Italy, and after making war on the Lucanians, he settled in Crimissa, near Croton and
 Thurium 165 ; and, his wanderings over, he founded a sanctuary of Apollo
 the Wanderer (Alaios), to whom also he dedicated his bow, as Euphorion says. 166 (Tzetzes, Scholia on Lycophron , 911)

 [E.6.15c] Navaethus is a river of Italy. 167 It was called so, according
 to Apollodorus and the rest, because after the capture of Ilium the daughters of Laomedon, the sisters of Priam,
 to wit, Aethylla, Astyoche, and Medesicaste, with the other female captives, finding themselves in that part of
 Italy, and dreading slavery in Greece, set fire to the vessels; whence the river was called Navaethus and the
 women were called Nauprestides; and the Greeks who were with the women, having lost the vessels, settled
 there. 168 (Tzetzes, Scholia on Lycophron , 921)

 [E.6.16] Demophon with a few ships put in to the land of the Thracian Bisaltians, 169 and there Phyllis, the king's daughter, falling in love with him, was
 given him in marriage by her father with the kingdom for her dower. But he wished to depart to his own country,
 and after many entreaties and swearing to return, he did depart. And Phyllis accompanied him as far as what are
 called the Nine Roads, and she gave him a casket, telling him that it contained a sacrament of Mother Rhea, and
 that he was not to open it until he should have abandoned all hope of returning to her.

 [E.6.17] And Demophon went to Cyprus and dwelt there. And when the appointed time was past, Phyllis called down
 curses on Demophon and killed herself; and Demophon opened the casket, and, being struck with fear, he mounted
 his horse and galloping wildly met his end; for, the horse stumbling, he was thrown and fell on his sword. But
 his people settled in Cyprus. 

 [E.6.18] Podalirius went to Delphi and inquired of the oracle where he should settle; and on receiving an
 oracle that he should settle in the city where, if the encompassing heaven were to fall, he would suffer no
 harm, he settled in that place of the Carian Chersonnese which is encircled by mountains all round the
 horizon. 170 

 [E.6.19] Amphilochus son of Alcmaeon, who, according to some, arrived later at Troy, was driven in the storm to
 the home of Mopsus; and, as some say, they fought a single combat for the kingdom, and slew each other. 171 

 [E.6.20] The Locrians regained their own country with difficulty, and three years afterwards, when Locris was
 visited by a plague, they received an oracle bidding them to propitiate Athena at Ilium and to send two maidens
 as suppliants for a thousand years. The lot first fell on Periboea and Cleopatra. 

 [E.6.21] And when they came to Troy they were chased by the natives and took refuge in the sanctuary. And they
 did not approach the goddess, but swept and sprinkled the sanctuary; and they did not go out of the temple, and
 their hair was cropped, and they wore single garments and no shoes.

 [E.6.22] And when the first maidens died, they sent others; and they entered into the city by night, lest,
 being seen outside the precinct, they should be put to the sword; but afterwards they sent babes with their
 nurses. And when the thousand years were passed, after the Phocian war they ceased to send suppliants. 172 

 [E.6.23] After Agamemnon had returned to Mycenae with Cassandra, he was murdered by Aegisthus and
 Clytaemnestra; for she gave him a shirt without sleeves and without a neck, and while he was putting it on he
 was cut down, and Aegisthus reigned over Mycenae. 173 And they killed
 Cassandra also. 174 

 [E.6.24] But Electra, one of Agamemnon's daughters, smuggled away her brother Orestes and gave him to
 Strophius, the Phocian, to bring up; and he brought him up with Pylades, his own son. 175 And when Orestes was grown up, he repaired to Delphi and asked the god
 whether he should take vengeance on his father's murderers. 

 [E.6.25] The god gave him leave, so he departed secretly to Mycenae in company with Pylades, and killed both
 his mother and Aegisthus. 176 And not long afterwards, being afflicted
 with madness and pursued by the Furies, he repaired to Athens and was tried in the Areopagus. He is variously
 said to have been brought to trial by the Furies, or by Tyndareus, or by Erigone, daughter of Aegisthus and
 Clytaemnestra; and the votes at his trial being equal he was acquitted. 177 

 [E.6.26] When he inquired how he should be rid of his disorder, the god answered that he would be rid of it if
 he should fetch the wooden image that was in the land of the Taurians. 178 
 Now the Taurians are a part of the Scythians, who murder strangers 179 and
 throw them into the sacred fire, which was in the precinct, being wafted up from Hades through a certain
 rock. 180 

 [E.6.27] So when Orestes was come with Pylades to the land of the Taurians, he was detected, caught, and
 carried in bonds before Thoas the king, who sent them both to the priestess. But being recognized by his sister,
 who acted as priestess among the Taurians, he fled with her, carrying off the wooden image. 181 It was conveyed to Athens and is now called the image of
 Tauropolus. 182 But some say that Orestes was driven in a storm to the
 island of Rhodes, . . . and in accordance with an oracle the image was dedicated in a fortification wall. 183 

 [E.6.28] and having come to Mycenae, he united his sister Electra in marriage to Pylades, 184 and having himself married Hermione, or, according to some, Erigone, he
 begat Tisamenus, 185 and was killed by the bite of a snake at Oresteum in
 Arcadia. 186 

 [E.6.29] Menelaus, with five ships in all under his command, put in at Sunium, a headland of Attica; and being
 again driven thence by winds to Crete he drifted far away, and wandering up and down Libya, and Phoenicia, and
 Cyprus, and Egypt, he collected much treasure. 187 And according to some,
 he discovered Helen at the court of Proteus, king of Egypt; for till then Menelaus had only a phantom of her
 made of clouds. 188 And after wandering for eight years he came to port at
 Mycenae, and there found Orestes, who had avenged his father's murder. And having come to Sparta he regained his
 own kingdom, 189 and being made immortal by Hera he went to the Elysian
 Fields with Helen. 190 

 [E.7.1] Ulysses, as some say, wandered about Libya, or, as some say, about Sicily, or, as
 others say, about the ocean or about the Tyrrhenian Sea.

 [E.7.2] And putting to sea from Ilium, he touched at Ismarus, a city of the Cicones, and captured it in war,
 and pillaged it, sparing Maro alone, who was priest of Apollo. 191 And
 when the Cicones who inhabited the mainland heard of it, they came in arms to withstand him, and having lost six
 men from each ship he put to sea and fled. 

 [E.7.3] And he landed in the country of the Lotus-eaters, 192 and sent
 some to learn who inhabited it, but they tasted of the lotus and remained there; for there grew in the country a
 sweet fruit called lotus, which caused him who tasted it to forget everything. When Ulysses was informed of
 this, he restrained the rest of his men, and dragged those who had tasted the lotus by force to the ships. And
 having sailed to the land of the Cyclopes, he stood in for the shore. 

 [E.7.4] And having left the rest of the ships in the neighboring island, he stood in for the land of the
 Cyclopes with a single ship, and landed with twelve companions. 193 And
 near the sea was a cave which he entered, taking with him the skin of wine that had been given him by Maro. Now
 the cave belonged to Polyphemus, who was a son of Poseidon and the nymph Thoosa, a huge, wild, cannibal man,
 with one eye on his forehead.

 [E.7.5] And having lit a fire and sacrificed some of the kids, they feasted. But the Cyclops came, and when he
 had driven in his flocks, he put a huge stone to the door, and perceiving the men he ate some of them. 

 [E.7.6] But Ulysses gave him of Maro's wine to drink, and when he had drunk, he asked for another draught, and
 when he had drunk the second, he inquired his name; and when Ulysses said that he was called Nobody, he
 threatened to devour Nobody last and the others first, and that was the token of friendship which he promised to
 give him in return. And being overcome by wine, he fell asleep. 

 [E.7.7] But Ulysses found a club lying there, and with the help of four comrades he sharpened it, and, having
 heated it in the fire, he blinded him. And when Polyphemus cried to the Cyclopes round about for help, they came
 and asked who was hurting him, and when he said, “Nobody,” they thought he meant that he was being
 hurt by nobody, and so they retired. 

 [E.7.8] And when the flocks sought their usual pasture, he opened the cave, and standing at the doorway spread
 out his hands and felt the sheep. But Ulysses tied three rams together, . . . and himself getting under the
 bigger, and hiding under its belly, he passed out with the sheep. And having released his comrades from the
 sheep, he drove the animals to the ships, and sailing away shouted to the Cyclops that he was Ulysses and that
 he had escaped out of his hands.

 [E.7.9] Now the Cyclops had been forewarned by a soothsayer that he should be blinded by Ulysses; and when he
 learned the name, he tore away rocks and hurled them into the sea, and hardly did the ship evade the rocks. From
 that time Poseidon was wroth with Ulysses. 

 [E.7.10] Having put to sea with all his ships, he came to the island of Aeolia, of which the king was
 Aeolus. 194 He was appointed by Zeus keeper of the winds, both to calm
 them and to send them forth. Having entertained Ulysses, he gave him an oxhide bag in which he had bound fast
 the winds, after showing what winds to use on the voyage and binding fast the bag in the vessel. And by using
 suitable winds Ulysses had a prosperous voyage; and when he was near Ithaca and already saw the smoke rising
 from the town, 195 he fell asleep. 

 [E.7.11] But his comrades, thinking he carried gold in the bag, loosed it and let the winds go free, and being
 swept away by the blasts they were driven back again. And having come to Aeolus, Ulysses begged that he might be
 granted a fair wind; but Aeolus drove him from the island, saying that he could not save him when the gods
 opposed. 

 [E.7.12] So sailing on he came to the land of the Laestrygones, 196 and .
 . . his own ship he moored last. Now the Laestrygones were cannibals, and their king was Antiphates. Wishing,
 therefore, to learn about the inhabitants, Ulysses sent some men to inquire. But the king's daughter met them
 and led them to her father.

 [E.7.13] And he snatched up one of them and devoured him; but the rest fled, and he pursued them, shouting and
 calling together the rest of the Laestrygones. They came to the sea, and by throwing stones they broke the
 vessels and ate the men. Ulysses cut the cable of his ship and put to sea; but the rest of the ships perished
 with their crews. 

 [E.7.14] With one ship he put in to the Aeaean isle. It was inhabited by Circe, a daughter of the Sun and of
 Perse, and a sister of Aeetes; skilled in all enchantments was she. 197 
 Having divided his comrades, Ulysses himself abode by the ship, in accordance with the lot, but Eurylochus with
 two and twenty comrades repaired to Circe. 

 [E.7.15] At her call they all entered except Eurylochus; and to each she gave a tankard she had filled with
 cheese and honey and barley meal and wine, and mixed with an enchantment. And when they had drunk, she touched
 them with a wand and changed their shapes, and some she made wolves, and some swine, and some asses, and some
 lions. 198 

 [E.7.16] But Eurylochus saw these things and reported them to Ulysses. And Ulysses went to Circe with
 moly, 199 which he had received from Hermes, and throwing the moly among
 her enchantments, he drank and alone was not enchanted. Then drawing his sword, he would have killed her, but
 she appeased his wrath and restored his comrades. And when he had taken an oath of her that he should suffer no
 harm, Ulysses shared her bed, and a son, Telegonus, was born to him. 200 

 [E.7.17] Having tarried a year there, he sailed the ocean, and offered sacrifices to the souls, 201 and by Circe's advice consulted the soothsayer Tiresias, 202 and beheld the souls both of heroes and of heroines. He also looked on
 his mother Anticlia 203 and Elpenor, who had died of a fall in the house
 of Circe. 204 

 [E.7.18] And having come to Circe he was sent on his way by her, and put to sea, and sailed past the isle of
 the Sirens. 205 Now the Sirens were Pisinoe, Aglaope, and Thelxiepia,
 daughters of Achelous and Melpomene, one of the Muses. One of them played the lyre, another sang, and another
 played the flute, and by these means they were fain to persuade passing mariners to linger;

 [E.7.19] and from the thighs they had the forms of birds. 206 Sailing by
 them, Ulysses wished to hear their song, so by Circe's advice he stopped the ears of his comrades with wax, and
 ordered that he should himself be bound to the mast. And being persuaded by the Sirens to linger, he begged to
 be released, but they bound him the more, and so he sailed past. Now it was predicted of the Sirens that they
 should themselves die when a ship should pass them; so die they did. 207 

 [E.7.20] And after that he came to two ways. On the one side were the Wandering Rocks, 208 and on the other side two huge cliffs, and in one of them was
 Scylla, 209 a daughter of Crataeis and Trienus or Phorcus, 210 with the face and breast of a woman, but from the flanks she had six
 heads and twelve feet of dogs. 

 [E.7.21] And in the other cliff was Charybdis, who thrice a day drew up the water and spouted it again. By the
 advice of Circe he shunned the passage by the Wandering Rocks, and in sailing past the cliff of Scylla he stood
 fully armed on the poop. But Scylla appeared, snatched six of his comrades, and gobbled them up.

 [E.7.22] And thence he came to Thrinacia, an island of the Sun, where kine were grazing, and being windbound,
 he tarried there. 211 But when his comrades slaughtered some of the kine
 and banqueted on them, for lack of food, the Sun reported it to Zeus, and when Ulysses put out to sea, Zeus
 struck him with a thunderbolt. 212 

 [E.7.23] And when the ship broke up, Ulysses clung to the mast and drifted to Charybdis. And when Charybdis
 sucked down the mast, he clutched an overhanging wild fig-tree and waited, and when he saw the mast shot up
 again, he cast himself on it, and was carried across to the island of Ogygia. 213 

 [E.7.24] There Calypso, daughter of Atlas, received him, and bedding with him bore a son Latinus. He stayed
 with her five years, and then made a raft and sailed away. 214 But on the
 high sea the raft was broken in pieces by the wrath of Poseidon, and Ulysses was washed up naked on the shore of
 the Phaeacians. 215 

 [E.7.25] Now Nausicaa, the daughter of king Alcinous, was washing the clothes, and when Ulysses implored her
 protection, she brought him to Alcinous, who entertained him, and after bestowing gifts on him sent him away
 with a convoy to his native land. 216 But Poseidon was wroth with the
 Phaeacians, and he turned the ship to stone and enveloped the city with a mountain. 217 

 [E.7.26] And on arriving in his native land Ulysses found his substance wasted; for, believing that he was
 dead, suitors were wooing Penelope. 218 From Dulichium came fifty-seven:

 [E.7.27] Amphinomus, Thoas, Demoptolemus, Amphimachus, Euryalus, Paralus, Evenorides, Clytius, Agenor,
 Eurypylus, Pylaemenes, Acamas, Thersilochus, Hagius, Clymenus, Philodemus, Meneptolemus, Damastor, Bias,
 Telmius, Polyidus, Astylochus, Schedius, Antigonus, Marpsius, Iphidamas, Argius, Glaucus, Calydoneus, Echion,
 Lamas, Andraemon, Agerochus, Medon, Agrius, Promus, Ctesius, Acarnan, Cycnus, Pseras, Hellanicus, Periphron,
 Megasthenes, Thrasymedes, Ormenius, Diopithes, Mecisteus, Antimachus, Ptolemaeus, Lestorides, Nicomachus,
 Polypoetes, and Ceraus. 

 [E.7.28] And from Same there came twenty-three:- Agelaus, Pisander, Elatus, Ctesippus, Hippodochus,
 Eurystratus, Archemolus, Ithacus, Pisenor, Hyperenor, Pheroetes, Antisthenes, Cerberus, Perimedes, Cynnus,
 Thriasus, Eteoneus, Clytius, Prothous, Lycaethus, Eumelus, Itanus, Lyammus. 

 [E.7.29] And from Zacynthos came forty-four: Eurylochus, Laomedes, Molebus, Phrenius, Indius, Minis, Liocritus,
 Pronomus, Nisas, Daemon, Archestratus, Hippomachus, Euryalus, Periallus, Evenorides, Clytius, Agenor, Polybus,
 Polydorus, Thadytius, Stratius, Phrenius, Indius, Daesenor, Laomedon, Laodicus, Halius, Magnes, Oloetrochus,
 Barthas, Theophron, Nissaeus, Alcarops, Periclymenus, Antenor, Pellas, Celtus, Periphus, Ormenus, Polybus and
 Andromedes.

 [E.7.30] And from Ithaca itself the suitors were twelve, to wit:- Antinous, Pronous, Liodes, Eurynomus,
 Amphimachus, Amphialus, Promachus, Amphimedon, Aristratus, Helenus, Dulicheus, and Ctesippus. 

 [E.7.31] These, journeying to the palace, consumed the herds of Ulysses at their feasts. 219 And Penelope was compelled to promise that she would wed when the shroud
 of Laertes was finished, and she wove it for three years, weaving it by day and undoing it by night. In this way
 the suitors were deceived by Penelope, till she was detected. 220 

 [E.7.32] And Ulysses, being apprized of the state of things at home, came to his servant Eumaeus in the guise
 of a beggar, 221 and made himself known to Telemachus, 222 and arrived in the city. And Melanthius, the goatherd, a servant man, met
 them, and scorned them. 223 On coming to the palace Ulysses begged food of
 the suitors, 224 and finding a beggar called Irus he wrestled with
 him. 225 But he revealed himself to Eumaeus and Philoetius, and along with
 them and Telemachus he laid a plot for the suitors. 226 

 [E.7.33] Now Penelope delivered to the suitors the bow of Ulysses, which he had once received from Iphitus; and
 she said that she would marry him who bent the bow. 227 When none of them
 could bend it, Ulysses took it and shot down the suitors, with the help of Eumaeus, Philoetius, and
 Telemachus. 228 He killed also Melanthius, and the handmaids that bedded
 with the suitors, 229 and he made himself known to his wife and his
 father. 230 

 [E.7.34] And after sacrificing to Hades, and Persephone, and Tiresias, he journeyed on foot through Epirus, and
 came to the Thesprotians, and having offered sacrifice according to the directions of the soothsayer Tiresias,
 he propitiated Poseidon. 231 But Callidice, who was then queen of the
 Thesprotians, urged him to stay and offered him the kingdom;

 [E.7.35] and she had by him a son Polypoetes. And having married Callidice, he reigned over the Thesprotians,
 and defeated in battle the neighboring peoples who attacked him. But when Callidice died he handed over the
 kingdom to his son and repaired to Ithaca, and there he found Poliporthes, whom Penelope had borne to
 him. 232 

 [E.7.36] When Telegonus learned from Circe that he was a son of Ulysses, he sailed in search of him. And having
 come to the island of Ithaca, he drove away some of the cattle, and when Ulysses defended them, Telegonus
 wounded him with the spear he had in his hands, which was barbed with the spine of a sting-ray, and Ulysses died
 of the wound. 233 

 [E.7.37] But when Telegonus recognized him, he bitterly lamented, and conveyed the corpse and Penelope to
 Circe, and there he married Penelope. And Circe sent them both away to the Islands of the Blest.

 [E.7.38] But some say that Penelope was seduced by Antinous and sent away by Ulysses to her father Icarius, and
 that when she came to Mantinea in Arcadia she bore Pan to Hermes. 234 

 [E.7.39] However others say that she met her end at the hands of Ulysses himself on account of
 Amphinomus, 235 for they allege that she was seduced by him. 

 [E.7.40] And there are some who say that Ulysses, being accused by the kinsfolk of the slain, submitted the
 case to the judgment of Neoptolemus, king of the islands off Epirus; that Neoptolemus, thinking to get
 possession of Cephallenia if once Ulysses were put out of the way, condemned him to exile 236 ; and that Ulysses went to Aetolia, to Thoas, son of Andraemon, married
 the daughter of Thoas, and leaving a son Leontophonus, whom he had by her, 237 died in old age.

 THE END

 SEARCH THEOI

 CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

 Aeschylus, Agamemnon 

 Aeschylus, Eumenides 

 Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 

 Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 

 Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 

 Aeschylus, Suppliant Women 

 Aeschylus, Fragments 

 Alcman, Fragments 

 Apollodorus, The Library 

 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 

 Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena 

 Bion, Poems 

 Callimachus, Hymns 

 Callistratus, Descriptions 

 Claudian, Gigantomachia 

 Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 

 Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks 

 Clement, Recognitions 

 Colluthus, Rape of Helen 

 Dares Phrygius 

 Dictys Cretensis 

 Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 

 Epic Cycle Fragments 

 Fulgentius, Mythologies 

 Greek Lyric Fragments 

 Hesiod, Shield of Heracles 

 Hesiod, Theogony 

 Hesiod, Works and Days 

 Hesiod, Fragments 

 Homer, Iliad 

 Homer, Odyssey 

 Homeric Hymns 

 Hyginus, Astronomica 

 Hyginus, Fabulae 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 

 Lycophron, Alexandra 

 Moschus, Poems 

 Nonnus, Dionysiaca 

 Orphic Hymns 

 Ovid, Fasti 

 Ovid, Heroides 

 Ovid, Metamorphoses 

 Parthenius, Love Romances 

 Pattern Poems 

 Pausanias, Description of Greece 

 Philostratus the Elder, Imagines 

 Philostratus the Younger, Imagines 

 Plutarch, Life of Theseus 

 Plutarch, Parallel Stories 

 Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy 

 Seneca, Agamemnon 

 Seneca, Hercules Furens 

 Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus 

 Seneca, Medea 

 Seneca, Oedipus 

 Seneca, Phaedra 

 Seneca, Phoenissae 

 Seneca, Thyestes 

 Seneca, Troades 

 Statius, Achilleid 

 Statius, Thebaid 

 Theocritus, Idylls 

 Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios 

 Tzetzes, Chiliades 

 Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica 

 Virgil, Aeneid 

 Virgil, Eclogues 

 Virgil, Georgics 

 RECENT ARTICLES 

 Who Was Achilles A Warrior? 

 What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules? 

 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z 

--> 

 .

 Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

 Contact Us