.

 Toggle navigation 
 Theoi Project - Classical Texts
 Library 

 LIBRARY HOME 
 GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
 GREEK GODS 
 
 Olympian Gods 
 Primordial Gods 
 Titan Gods 
 Sky Gods 
 Sea Gods 
 Rustic Gods 
 Underworld Gods 
 Daemones-Spirits 
 Nymphs 
 more >> 

 BESTIARY 
 HEROES 
 MISCELLANY 
 
 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z 
 Family Tree of the Gods 
 Legendary Tribes 
 Legendary Creatures 
 Star Myths 
 Plant & Flower Myths 

 GALLERY 

 Classical Texts
 Library >> Hyginus,
 Fabulae >> Fables 150-199 
 HYGINUS, FABULAE 150 - 199 

 FABLES 150 - 199, TRANSLATED BY MARY GRANT

 [150] CL. WAR WITH THE TITANS

 After Juno saw that Epaphus, born of a concubine, ruled such a great kingdom, she saw to it that he should be
 killed while hunting, and encouraged the Titans to drive Jove from the kingdom and restore it to Saturn. When
 they tried to mount heaven, Jove with the help of Minerva, Apollo, and Diana, cast them headlong into Tartarus.
 On Atlas, who had been their leader, he put the vault of the sky; even now he is said to hold up the sky on his
 shoulders.

 [151] CLI. CHILDREN OF TYPHON AND ECHIDNA

 From Typhon the giant and Echidna were born Gorgon, the three-headed dog Cerberus, the dragon which guarded the
 apples of the Hesperides across the ocean, the Hydra which Hercules killed by the spring of Lerna, the dragon
 which guarded the ram’s fleece at Colchis, Scylla who was woman above but dog below, with six dog-forms
 sprung from her body, the Sphinx which was in Boeotia, the Chimaera in Lycia which had the fore part of a lion,
 the hind part of a snake, while the she-goat itself formed the middle. From Medusa, daughter of Gorgon, and
 Neptues, were born Chrysaor and horse Pegasus; from Chrysaor and Callirhoe, three-formed Geryon.

 [152] CLII. TYPHON

 Tartarus begat by Tartara, Typhon, a creature of immense size and fearful shape, who had a hundred dragon heads
 springing from his shoulders. He challenged Jove to see if Jove would content with him for the rule. Jove struck
 his breast with a flaming thunderbolt. When it was burning him he put Mount Etna, which is in Sicily, over him.
 From this it is said to burn still.

 [152A] CLII A. PHAETHON

 Phaethon, son of Sol and Clymene, who had secretly mounted his father’s car, and had been borne too high
 above the earth, from fear fell into the river Eridanus. When Jupiter struck him with a thunderbolt, everything
 started to burn. In order to have a reason for destroying the whole race of mortals, Jove pretended he wanted to
 put out the fire; he let loose the rivers everywhere, and all the human race perished except Deucalion and
 Pyrrha. But the sisters of Phaethon, because they had yoked the horses without the orders of their father, were
 changed into poplar trees.

 [153] CLIII. DEUCALION AND PYRRHA

 When the cataclysm which we call the flood or deluge occurred, all the human race perished except Deucalion and
 Pyrrha, who fled to Mount Etna, which is said to be the highest mountain in Sicily. When they could not live on
 account of loneliness, they begged Jove either to give men, or to afflict them with a similar disaster. Then
 Jove bade them cast stones behind them; those Deucalion threw he ordered to become men, and those Pyrrha threw,
 to be women. Because of this they are called laos, “people”, for stone in Greek is called las.

 [154] CLIV. PHAETHON OF HESIOD

 Phaethon, son of Clymenus, son of Sol, and the nymph Merope, who, as we have heard was and Oceanid, upon being
 told by his father that his grandfather was Sol, put to bad use the chariot he asked for. For when he was
 carried too near the earth, everything burned in the fire that came near, and, struck by a thunderbolt, he fell
 into the river Po. This river is called Eridanus by the Greeks; Pherecydes was the first to name it. The Indians
 became black, because their blood was turned to a dark color from the heat that came near. The sister of
 Phaethon, too, in grieving for their brother, were changed into poplar trees. Their tears, as Hesiod tells,
 hardened into amber; [in spite of the change] they are called Heliades [daughters of Helios]. They are, then,
 Merope, Helie, Aegle, Lampetia, Phoebe, Aetherie, Dioxippe. Moreover, Cygnus, King of Liguria, who was related
 to Phaethon, while mourning for his relative was changed into a swan; it, too, when it dies sings a mournful
 song.

 [155] CLV. SONS OF JOVE

 Liber by Proserpine, whom the Titans dismembered. Hercules, by Alcumena. Liber by Semele, daughter of Cadmus
 and Harmonia. Castor and Pollux by Leda, daughter of Thestius. Argus by Nioba, daughter of Phoroneus. Epaphus by
 Io, daughter of Inachus. Perseus by Danae, daughter of Acrisius. Zethus and Amphion, by Antiopa, daughter of
 Nycteus. Minos, Sarpedon, and Rhadamanthus by Europa, daughter of Agenor. Helen by Pyrrha, daughter of
 Epimetheus. Aethlius by Protogenie, daughter of Deucalion. Dardanus by Electra, daughter of Atlas. Lacedaemon by
 Taygete, daughter of Atlas. Tantalus by Pluto, daughter of Himas. Aeacus by Aegina, daughter of Asopus. Aegipan
 by the she-goat *Boetis. Arcas by Callisto, daughter of Lycaon. [Etolus by Protogenia, daughter of Deucalion.]
 Pirithous by Dia, daughter of Deioneus.

 SEARCH THEOI

 CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

 Aeschylus, Agamemnon 

 Aeschylus, Eumenides 

 Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 

 Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 

 Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 

 Aeschylus, Suppliant Women 

 Aeschylus, Fragments 

 Alcman, Fragments 

 Apollodorus, The Library 

 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 

 Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena 

 Bion, Poems 

 Callimachus, Hymns 

 Callistratus, Descriptions 

 Claudian, Gigantomachia 

 Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 

 Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks 

 Clement, Recognitions 

 Colluthus, Rape of Helen 

 Dares Phrygius 

 Dictys Cretensis 

 Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 

 Epic Cycle Fragments 

 Fulgentius, Mythologies 

 Greek Lyric Fragments 

 Hesiod, Shield of Heracles 

 Hesiod, Theogony 

 Hesiod, Works and Days 

 Hesiod, Fragments 

 Homer, Iliad 

 Homer, Odyssey 

 Homeric Hymns 

 Hyginus, Astronomica 

 Hyginus, Fabulae 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 

 Lycophron, Alexandra 

 Moschus, Poems 

 Nonnus, Dionysiaca 

 Orphic Hymns 

 Ovid, Fasti 

 Ovid, Heroides 

 Ovid, Metamorphoses 

 Parthenius, Love Romances 

 Pattern Poems 

 Pausanias, Description of Greece 

 Philostratus the Elder, Imagines 

 Philostratus the Younger, Imagines 

 Plutarch, Life of Theseus 

 Plutarch, Parallel Stories 

 Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy 

 Seneca, Agamemnon 

 Seneca, Hercules Furens 

 Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus 

 Seneca, Medea 

 Seneca, Oedipus 

 Seneca, Phaedra 

 Seneca, Phoenissae 

 Seneca, Thyestes 

 Seneca, Troades 

 Statius, Achilleid 

 Statius, Thebaid 

 Theocritus, Idylls 

 Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios 

 Tzetzes, Chiliades 

 Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica 

 Virgil, Aeneid 

 Virgil, Eclogues 

 Virgil, Georgics 

 RECENT ARTICLES 

 Who Was Achilles A Warrior? 

 What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules? 

 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z 

--> 

 .

 Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

 Contact Us