.

 Toggle navigation 
 Theoi Project - Classical Texts
 Library 

 LIBRARY HOME 
 GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
 GREEK GODS 
 
 Olympian Gods 
 Primordial Gods 
 Titan Gods 
 Sky Gods 
 Sea Gods 
 Rustic Gods 
 Underworld Gods 
 Daemones-Spirits 
 Nymphs 
 more >> 

 BESTIARY 
 HEROES 
 MISCELLANY 
 
 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z 
 Family Tree of the Gods 
 Legendary Tribes 
 Legendary Creatures 
 Star Myths 
 Plant & Flower Myths 

 GALLERY 

 Classical Texts
 Library >> Hyginus,
 Fabulae >> Fables 100-149 
 HYGINUS, FABULAE 100 - 149 

 FABLES 100 - 149, TRANSLATED BY MARY GRANT

 [100] C. TEUTHRAS

 Idas, son of Aphareus, wished to rob Teuthras, king of Moesia, of his kingdom. When Telephus, Hercules’
 son, with Parthenopaeus his friend, ahd come there seeking his mother in accordance with the oracle, Teuthras
 promised he would give him his kingdom and his daughter Auge in marriage if he would protect him from his enemy.
 Telephus did not disregard the proposal of the king, and with Parthenopaeus’ help overcame Idas in one
 battle. The king fulfilled his promise, and gave him his kingdom and Auge as wife, unaware of the relationship.
 Since she [faithful to Hercules] wished no mortal to violate her body, she intended to kill Telephus, not
 realizing he was her son. And so when they had entered the wedding-chamber, Auge drew a sword to slay Telephus.
 Then by the will of the gods a serpent of huge size is said to have glided between them, and at the sight Auge
 dropped the sword and revealed her attempt to Telephus. Telephus, when he heard this, not realizing she was his
 mother, was about to kill her, but she called for help on Hercules her ravisher, and by that means Telephus
 recognized his mother, and took her back to her own country.

 [101] CI. TELEPHUS

 Telephus, son of Hercules and Auge, is said to have been wounded by Achilles in battle with the spear of
 Chiron. When for days he suffered cruel torture from the wound, he sought oracular advice from Apollo for a
 remedy. The answer came that no one could heal him except the very spear that wounded him. When Telephus heard
 this, he went to King Agamemnon, and by Clytemnestra’s advice snatched the infant Orestes from his cradle,
 threatening to kill him if the Achaeans did not heal him. Then since the Achaeans had been given an oracle too,
 that Troy could not be taken without the leadership of Telephus, they readily made peace with him, and begged
 Achilles to heal him. Achilles replied that he didn’t know the art of healing. Then Ulysses said: Apollo
 does not mean you, but calls the spear the inflictor of the wound.” When they scraped it, he was healed.
 When they begged him to go with them to attack Troy, they did not obtain their request, because he had as wife
 Laodice, daughter of Priam. But in return for their kindness in healing him, he led them there, pointing out
 places and ways. From there he departed to Moesia.

 [102] CII. PHILOCTETES

 When Philoctetes, son of Poeas and Demonassa, was on the island of Lemnos, a snake struck his foot. Juno had
 sent it, angry with him because he alone rather than the others had dared to build the funeral pyre of Hercules
 when his human body was consumed and he was raised to immortality. Because of the favour Hercules gave him his
 marvellous arrows. But when the Achaeans could not endure the offensive odour of the wound, by Agamemnon’s
 order he was left on Lemnos together with the marvellous arrows. A shepherd of King Actor, named Iphimachus, son
 of Dolops, cared for the abandoned man. Later an oracle was given to them that Troy could not be taken without
 the arrows of Hercules. Then Agamemnon sent Ulysses and Diomede as scouts to visit him. They persuaded him to be
 reconciled and to help in attacking Troy, and took him off with them.

 [103] CIII. PROTESILAUS

 An oracle warned the Achaeans that the man who first reached the shore of the Trojans would perish. When the
 Greek fleet had neared shore, and the others were delaying, Iolaus, son of Iphiclus and Diomedia, was first to
 leap from his ship, and was promptly killed by Hector. All called him Protesilaus, since he was the first of all
 to die. When his wife Laodamia, daughter of Acastus, heard that he had died, she wept and begged the gods that
 she be allowed to speak with him for three hours. It was granted, and when he was led back by Mercury, she spoke
 with him for three hours. But when Protesilaus died a second time, Laodamia, could not endure her grief.

 SEARCH THEOI

 CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

 Aeschylus, Agamemnon 

 Aeschylus, Eumenides 

 Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 

 Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 

 Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 

 Aeschylus, Suppliant Women 

 Aeschylus, Fragments 

 Alcman, Fragments 

 Apollodorus, The Library 

 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 

 Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena 

 Bion, Poems 

 Callimachus, Hymns 

 Callistratus, Descriptions 

 Claudian, Gigantomachia 

 Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 

 Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks 

 Clement, Recognitions 

 Colluthus, Rape of Helen 

 Dares Phrygius 

 Dictys Cretensis 

 Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 

 Epic Cycle Fragments 

 Fulgentius, Mythologies 

 Greek Lyric Fragments 

 Hesiod, Shield of Heracles 

 Hesiod, Theogony 

 Hesiod, Works and Days 

 Hesiod, Fragments 

 Homer, Iliad 

 Homer, Odyssey 

 Homeric Hymns 

 Hyginus, Astronomica 

 Hyginus, Fabulae 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 

 Lycophron, Alexandra 

 Moschus, Poems 

 Nonnus, Dionysiaca 

 Orphic Hymns 

 Ovid, Fasti 

 Ovid, Heroides 

 Ovid, Metamorphoses 

 Parthenius, Love Romances 

 Pattern Poems 

 Pausanias, Description of Greece 

 Philostratus the Elder, Imagines 

 Philostratus the Younger, Imagines 

 Plutarch, Life of Theseus 

 Plutarch, Parallel Stories 

 Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy 

 Seneca, Agamemnon 

 Seneca, Hercules Furens 

 Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus 

 Seneca, Medea 

 Seneca, Oedipus 

 Seneca, Phaedra 

 Seneca, Phoenissae 

 Seneca, Thyestes 

 Seneca, Troades 

 Statius, Achilleid 

 Statius, Thebaid 

 Theocritus, Idylls 

 Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios 

 Tzetzes, Chiliades 

 Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica 

 Virgil, Aeneid 

 Virgil, Eclogues 

 Virgil, Georgics 

 RECENT ARTICLES 

 Who Was Achilles A Warrior? 

 What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules? 

 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z 

--> 

 .

 Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

 Contact Us