.

 Toggle navigation 
 Theoi Project - Classical Texts
 Library 

 LIBRARY HOME 
 GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
 GREEK GODS 
 
 Olympian Gods 
 Primordial Gods 
 Titan Gods 
 Sky Gods 
 Sea Gods 
 Rustic Gods 
 Underworld Gods 
 Daemones-Spirits 
 Nymphs 
 more >> 

 BESTIARY 
 HEROES 
 MISCELLANY 
 
 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z 
 Family Tree of the Gods 
 Legendary Tribes 
 Legendary Creatures 
 Star Myths 
 Plant & Flower Myths 

 GALLERY 

 Classical Texts
 Library >> Hyginus, Fabulae >> Fables
 1-49 
 HYGINUS, FABULAE 1 - 49 

 GAIUS JULIUS HYGINUS was a Latin writer who flourished in Roman Spain in the C1st AD. Two extant collections of
 fables were attributed to him: the Fabulae (or Fables) and Astronomica (or Astronomy). The poor quality of these
 works lead most to believe they are either wrongly attributed to this distinguished scholar or are a later
 abridgement of his works composed by a C2nd grammarian. In spite of the poor writing style and numerous errors,
 the works do preserve many myths and alternative versions of myths not found elsewhere.

 The Myths of Hyginus, translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic
 Studies, no. 34. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960.

 Mary Grant's translation is long out of print and second hand copies of this book are very hard to come by. The
 work includes an introduction and copious footnotes, neither of which have not been reproduced here. Recent
 translation of Hyginus' Astronomica can be found in the book titled Star Myths by Condos and a selection of both
 the Fables and Astronomy are included in the Anthology of Greek Myth by T. G. Palaima (see book list right).

 FABLES 1 - 49, TRANSLATED BY MARY GRANT

 KEY: * = corrupt text . . . = missing text

 PREFACE

 Excerpts from the Genealogiae of Hyginus, commonly called the Fabulae Preface

 From Mist (was born) Chaos; from Chaos and Caligine: Night, Day, Erebus, Aether.

 From Night and Erebus: Fate, Old Age, Death, Dissolution, *Continence, Sleep, Dreams, Love – that is,
 Lysimeles, *Epiphron, Porphyrion, Epaphus, Discord, Wretchedness, Wantonness, Nemesis, Euphrosyne, Friendship,
 Compassion, Styx; the three Fates, namely, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos; the Hesperides, Aegle, Hesperie,
 *aerica.

 From Aether and Day, Earth, Heaven Sea.

 From Aether and Earth: Grief, Deceit, Wrath, Lamentation, Falsehood, Oath, Vengeance, Intemperance, Altercation,
 Forgetfulness, Sloth, Fear, Pride, Incest, Combat, Ocean, Themis, Tartarus, Pontus; and the Titans, Briareus,
 Gyges, Steropes, Atlas, Hyperion, and Polus, Saturn, Ops, Moneta, Dione; and three Furies – namely,
 Alecto, Megaera, Tisiphone.

 From Earth and Tartarus, Giants: Enceladus, Coeus, *elentes, *mophius, Astraeus, Pelorus, Pallas, Emphytus,
 Rhoecus, *ienios, Agrius, *alemone, Ephialtes, Eurytus, *effracorydon, Themoises, Theodamas, Otus, Typhon,
 Polybo[e}tes, *menephriarus, *abesus, *colophonus, Iapetus.

 From Pontus and Sea, the tribes of fishes.

 From Ocean and Tethys the Oceanides - namely *yaea Melite, Ianthe, Admete, Stilbo, Pasiphae, Polyxo, Eurynome,
 Euagoreis, Rhodope, *lyris, Clytie, *teschinoeno, *clitenneste, Metis, Menippe, Argia. Of the same descent
 Rivers: Strymon, Nilus, Euphrates, Tanais, Indus, Cephisus, Ismenus, Axenus, Achelous, Simois, Inachus, Alpheus,
 Therodoon, Scamandrus, Tigris, Maeandrus, Orontes.

 From Pontos and Earth, Thaumas, *tusciuersus, *cepheus

 From Nereus and Doris fifty Nereids: Glauce, Thalia, Cymodoce, Nesaea, Spio, Thoe, Cymothoe[a], Actaea,
 Limnoria, Melite, Iaera, Amphithoe, Agaue, Doto, Prot[h]o, Pherusa, Dynamene, Dexamene, Amphnome, Callianassa,
 Doris, Panope, Galat[h]ea, Nemertes, Apseudes, Clymene, Ianira, [Panopea], Ianassa, Maera, Orithyia, Amathia,
 Drymo, Xantho, Ligea, Phyllodoce, Cydippe, Lycorias, Cleio, Beroe, Ephyre, Opis, Asia, Deiopea, Arethusa,
 [Clymene], Creneis, Eurydice, Leucothea.

 From Phorcus and Ceto: Phorcides Pemphredo, Enyo and Persis (for this last others say Dino).

 From Gorgon and Ceto, Sthenno, Eurylae, Medusa

 From Polus and Phoebe, Latone, Asterie, *aphirape . . . Perses, Pallas.

 From Iapetus and Clymene, Atlas, Epimetheus, Prometheus.

 From Hyperion and Aethra, Sol, Luna, Aurora.

 From Saturn and Ops, Vesta, Ceres, Iuno, Jupiter, Pluto, Neptune.

 From Saturs and Philyra, Chiron, Dolops.

 From Astraeus and Aurora, Zephyrus, Boreas, Notus, Favonius.

 From Atlas and Pleione, Maia, Calypso, Alcyone, Merope, Electra, Celaeno.

 From Pallas the giant and Styx, Scylla, Force, Envy, Power, Victory, Fountains, Lakes.

 From Neptune and Amphitrite, Triton.

 From Dione and Jove, Venus.

 From Jove and Juno, Mars.

 From Jove’s head, Minerva.

 From Juno without father, Vulcan.

 From Jove and Eurynome, Graces.

 Again from Jove and Juno, Youth, Liberty.

 From Jove and Themis, the Hours.

 From Jove and Ceres, Proserpina.

 From Jove and Moneta, the Muses.

 From Jove and Luna, Pandia.

 From Venus and Mars, Harmonia, and Formido.

 From Acheloos and Melpomene, the Sirens, Thelxiepe, Molpe and Pisinoe.

 From Jove and Clymene, Mnemosyne.

 From Jove ant Maia, Mercury.

 From Jove and Latona, Apollo and Diana.

 From Earth, Python, a divine (prophetic) snake.

 From Thaumas and Electra: Iris, Harpies, Celaeno, Ocypete, Podarce.

 From Sol and Persa, Circe, Pasiphae, Aeeta, Perses.

 From Aeeta and Clytia, Medea.

 From Sol and Clymene, Phaethon and the Phaethontides, Merope, Helie, Aetherie, Dioxippe.

 From Typhon and Echidna: Gorgon, Cerberus, the dragon which guarded the Golden Fleece at Colchis, Scylla who was
 woman above but dog-forms below [whom Hercules killed]; Chimaera, Sphinx who was in Boeotia, Hydra serpent which
 had nine heads which Hercules killed, and the dragon of the Hesperides.

 From Neptune and Medusa, the horse Pegasus.

 From Chrysaor and Callirhoe,: three-formed Geryon.

 [1] I. THEMISTO

 Athamas, son of Aeolus, had by his wife Nebula a son Phrixus and a daughter Helle, and by Themisto, daughter of
 Hypseus, two son, Sphincius and Orchomenus, and by Ino, daughter of Cadmus, two sons, Learchus and Melicertes.
 Themisto, robbed of her marriage by Ino, wished to kill Ino’s children. She hid, therefore, in the palace,
 and when an opportunity presented itself, thinking she was killing the sons of her rival, unwittingly killed her
 own, deceived by the nurse who had put the wrong garments on them. When Themisto discovered this, she killed
 herself.

 [2] II. INO

 Ino, daughter of Cadmus and Harmonia, wishing to kill Phrixus and Helle, Nebula’s children, formed a plan
 with the women of the entire tribe, and conspired to parch the seed grain to make it unfertile, so that, when
 the sterility and scarcity of grain resulted, the whole state should perish, some by starvation, others by
 sickness. With regard to this situation Athamas sent a servant to Delphi, but Ino instructed him to bring back a
 false reply that the pestilence would end if he sacrificed Phrixus to Jove. When Athamas refused to do this,
 Phrixus voluntarily and readily promised that he alone would free the state from its distress. Accordingly he
 was led to the altar, wearing fillets (of sacrifice), but the servant, out of pity for the youth, revealed
 Ino’s plans to Athamas. The king, thus informed of the crime, gave over his wife Ino and her son
 Melicertes to be put to death, but Father Liber cast mist around her, and saved Ino his nurse. Later, Athamas,
 driven mad by Jove, slew his son Learchus. But Ino, with Melicertes her son, threw herself into the sea. Liber
 would have her called Leucothea, and Melicertes, her son the god Palaemon, butwe call her Mater Matuta, and him
 Portunus. In his honor every fifth year gymnastic contests are held, which are called Isthmian.

 [3] III. PHRIXUS

 While Phrixus and Helle under madness sent by Liber were wandering in a forest, Nebula their mother is said to
 have come there bringing a gilded ram, offspring of Neptune and Theophane. She bade her children to mount it,
 and journey to Colchis to King Aeetes, son of Sol, and there sacrifice the ram to Mars. This they were said to
 have done, but when they had mounted, and the ram had carried them over the sea, Helle fell from the ram; from
 this sea was called Hellespont. Phrixus, however, was carried to Colchis, where, as his mother had bidden, he
 sacrificed the ram, and placed its gilded fleece in the temple of Mars - the very fleece which, guarded by a
 dragon, it is said Jason, son of Aeson and Alcimede, came to secure. But Aeetes gladly welcomed Phrixus, and
 gave him his daughter Chalciope in marriage. She later bore him children, but Aeetes feared that they would
 drive him from his kingdom, because he had been warned by prodigies to beware of death at the hands of a
 foreigner, a son of Aeolus. Therefore he killed Phrixus. But Phrixus’ sons – Argus, Melas, and
 Cylindrus – took ship to go to their grandfather Athamas. They were shipwrecked, however, and Jason, on
 his trip for the fleece, rescued them from the island of Dia, and took them back to their mother Chalciope. By
 her favour he was recommended to her sister Medea.

 [4] IV. INO OF EURIPIDES

 When Athamas, king in Thessaly, thought that his wife Ino, by whom he begat two sons, had perished, he married
 Themisto, the daughter of a nymph, and had twin sons by her. Later he discovered that Ino was on Parnassus,
 where she had gone for the Bacchic revels. He sent someone to bring her home, and concealed her when she came.
 Themisto discovered she had been found, but didn’t know her identity. She conceived the desire of killing
 Ino’s sons, and made Ino herself, whom she believed to be a captive, a confidant in the plan, telling her
 to cover her children with white garments, but Ino’s with black. Ino covered her own with white, and
 Themisto’s with dark; then Themisto mistakenly slew her own sons. When she discovered this, she killed
 herself. Moreover, Athamas, while hunting, in a fit of madness killed his older son Learchus; but Ino with the
 younger, Melicertes, cast herself intot he sea and was made a goddess.

 SEARCH THEOI

 CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

 Aeschylus, Agamemnon 

 Aeschylus, Eumenides 

 Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 

 Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 

 Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 

 Aeschylus, Suppliant Women 

 Aeschylus, Fragments 

 Alcman, Fragments 

 Apollodorus, The Library 

 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 

 Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena 

 Bion, Poems 

 Callimachus, Hymns 

 Callistratus, Descriptions 

 Claudian, Gigantomachia 

 Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 

 Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks 

 Clement, Recognitions 

 Colluthus, Rape of Helen 

 Dares Phrygius 

 Dictys Cretensis 

 Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 

 Epic Cycle Fragments 

 Fulgentius, Mythologies 

 Greek Lyric Fragments 

 Hesiod, Shield of Heracles 

 Hesiod, Theogony 

 Hesiod, Works and Days 

 Hesiod, Fragments 

 Homer, Iliad 

 Homer, Odyssey 

 Homeric Hymns 

 Hyginus, Astronomica 

 Hyginus, Fabulae 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 

 Lycophron, Alexandra 

 Moschus, Poems 

 Nonnus, Dionysiaca 

 Orphic Hymns 

 Ovid, Fasti 

 Ovid, Heroides 

 Ovid, Metamorphoses 

 Parthenius, Love Romances 

 Pattern Poems 

 Pausanias, Description of Greece 

 Philostratus the Elder, Imagines 

 Philostratus the Younger, Imagines 

 Plutarch, Life of Theseus 

 Plutarch, Parallel Stories 

 Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy 

 Seneca, Agamemnon 

 Seneca, Hercules Furens 

 Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus 

 Seneca, Medea 

 Seneca, Oedipus 

 Seneca, Phaedra 

 Seneca, Phoenissae 

 Seneca, Thyestes 

 Seneca, Troades 

 Statius, Achilleid 

 Statius, Thebaid 

 Theocritus, Idylls 

 Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios 

 Tzetzes, Chiliades 

 Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica 

 Virgil, Aeneid 

 Virgil, Eclogues 

 Virgil, Georgics 

 RECENT ARTICLES 

 Who Was Achilles A Warrior? 

 What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules? 

 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z 

--> 

 .

 Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

 Contact Us