.

 Toggle navigation 
 Theoi Project - Classical Texts
 Library 

 LIBRARY HOME 
 GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
 GREEK GODS 
 
 Olympian Gods 
 Primordial Gods 
 Titan Gods 
 Sky Gods 
 Sea Gods 
 Rustic Gods 
 Underworld Gods 
 Daemones-Spirits 
 Nymphs 
 more >> 

 BESTIARY 
 HEROES 
 MISCELLANY 
 
 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z 
 Family Tree of the Gods 
 Legendary Tribes 
 Legendary Creatures 
 Star Myths 
 Plant & Flower Myths 

 GALLERY 

 Classical Texts
 Library >> Hyginus,
 Fabulae >> Fables 50-99 
 HYGINUS, FABULAE 50 - 99 

 FABLES 50 - 99, TRANSLATED BY MARY GRANT

 [50] L. ADMETUS

 When great numbers of suitors were seeking Alcestis, daughter of Pelias, in marriage, and Pelias was refusing
 many of them, he set a contest for them, promising that he would give her to the one who yoked wild beasts to a
 chariot. [He could take away whomever he wished.] And so Admetus begged Apollo to help him. Apollo, since he had
 been kindly treated when given in servitude to him, provided him with a wild boar and lion yoked together, and
 with these he bore off Alcestis in marriage.

 [51] LI. ALCESTIS

 Many suitors sought in marriage Alcestis, daughter of Pelias and Anaxibia, Bias’ daughter; but Pelias,
 avoiding their proposals, rejected them, and set a contest promising that he would give her to the one who yoked
 wild beast to a chariot and bore her off. Admetus asked Apollo to help him, and Apollo, because he had been
 kindly received by him while in servitude gave to him a wild boar and a lion yoked together, with which he
 carried off Alcestis.

 He obtained this, too, from Apollo, that another could voluntarily die in his place. When neither his father nor
 his mother was willing to die for him, his wife Alcestis offered herself, and died for him in vicarious death.
 Later Hercules called her back from the dead.

 [52] LII. AEGINA

 When Jupiter wished to lie with Aegina, the daughter of Asopus, he feared Juno, and took the girl to the island
 of Delos, and there made her pregnant. Aeacus was their son. When Juno found this out, she sent a serpent into
 the water which poisoned it, and if anyone drank from it, he paid the debt to nature. Since Aeacus, his allies
 lost, could not protect himself on account of the scarcity of men, as he gazed at some ants, he begged Jupiter
 to give him men for defense. Then Jupiter changed the ants into men, who were named Myrmidones, because in Greek
 ants are called ‘myrmekes’. The island, however, has the name of Aegina.

 [53] LIII. ASTERIE

 Though Jove loved Asterie, daughter of Titan, she scorned him. Therefore she was transformed into the bird
 ortux, which we call a quail, and he cast her into the sea. From her an island sprang up, which was named
 Ortygia. This was floating. Later Latona was borne there at Jove’s command by the wind Aquilo, at the time
 when the Python was pursuing her, and there, clinging to an olive, she gave birth to Apollo and Diana. This
 island later was called Delos.

 [54] LIV. THETIS

 A prediction about Thetis, the Nereid, was that her son would be greater than his father. Since no one but
 Prometheus knew this, and Jove wished to lie with her, Prometheus promised Jove that he would give him timely
 warning if he would free him from his chains. And so when the promise was given he advised Jove not to lie with
 Thetis, for if one greater than he were born he might drive Jove from his kingdom, as he himself had done to
 Saturn. And so Thetis was given in marriage to Peleus, son of Aeacus, and Hercules was sent to kill the eagle
 which was eating out Prometheus’ heart. When it was killed, Prometheus after thirty thousand years was
 freed from Mount Caucasus.

 [55] LV. TITYUS

 Because Latona had lain with Jove, Juno ordered Tityus, a creature of immense size, to offer violence to her.
 When he tried to do this he was slain by the thunderbolt of Jove [Zeus]. He is said to lie stretched out over
 nine acres in the Land of the Dead, and a serpent is put near him to eat out his liver, which grows again with
 the moon.

 SEARCH THEOI

 CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

 Aeschylus, Agamemnon 

 Aeschylus, Eumenides 

 Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 

 Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 

 Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 

 Aeschylus, Suppliant Women 

 Aeschylus, Fragments 

 Alcman, Fragments 

 Apollodorus, The Library 

 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 

 Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena 

 Bion, Poems 

 Callimachus, Hymns 

 Callistratus, Descriptions 

 Claudian, Gigantomachia 

 Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 

 Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks 

 Clement, Recognitions 

 Colluthus, Rape of Helen 

 Dares Phrygius 

 Dictys Cretensis 

 Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 

 Epic Cycle Fragments 

 Fulgentius, Mythologies 

 Greek Lyric Fragments 

 Hesiod, Shield of Heracles 

 Hesiod, Theogony 

 Hesiod, Works and Days 

 Hesiod, Fragments 

 Homer, Iliad 

 Homer, Odyssey 

 Homeric Hymns 

 Hyginus, Astronomica 

 Hyginus, Fabulae 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead 

 Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 

 Lycophron, Alexandra 

 Moschus, Poems 

 Nonnus, Dionysiaca 

 Orphic Hymns 

 Ovid, Fasti 

 Ovid, Heroides 

 Ovid, Metamorphoses 

 Parthenius, Love Romances 

 Pattern Poems 

 Pausanias, Description of Greece 

 Philostratus the Elder, Imagines 

 Philostratus the Younger, Imagines 

 Plutarch, Life of Theseus 

 Plutarch, Parallel Stories 

 Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy 

 Seneca, Agamemnon 

 Seneca, Hercules Furens 

 Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus 

 Seneca, Medea 

 Seneca, Oedipus 

 Seneca, Phaedra 

 Seneca, Phoenissae 

 Seneca, Thyestes 

 Seneca, Troades 

 Statius, Achilleid 

 Statius, Thebaid 

 Theocritus, Idylls 

 Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios 

 Tzetzes, Chiliades 

 Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica 

 Virgil, Aeneid 

 Virgil, Eclogues 

 Virgil, Georgics 

 RECENT ARTICLES 

 Who Was Achilles A Warrior? 

 What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules? 

 Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z 

--> 

 .

 Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

 Contact Us